DeepSeek just blew up the AI industrys narrative that it needs more money and power
The story of AI in the 2020s has gone something like this:

Sam Altman: Look, a toy that can write your book report.
VCs: This will fix everything!
Doomers: This will ruin everything.
Tech: We need money!
Everyone else: Could we maybe not destroy the environment over this?
Tech: Lets restart Three Mile Island.
Tech: We need money!
Wall Street: Wheres our return?
Tech: (Chants) More power! More power! More power!
And finally, in the year 2025, here comes DeepSeek to blow up the industrys whole narrative about AIs bottomless appetite for power, and potentially break the spell that had kept Wall Street funneling money to anyone with the words harnessing artificial intelligence in their pitch deck.

ICYMI: DeepSeek dropped a bomb known as R1 thats got all of Silicon Valley and much of Wall Street in a tizzy.

The Chinese companys large language model is basically a cheaper, more efficient ChatGPT, built on a fraction of OpenAIs budget and using far fewer chips than any other leading chatbot.

That is a massive earthquake in the AI sector, Gil Luria, head of tech research at investment group D.A. Davidson, told me. Everybody is looking at it and saying, We didnt think this is possible. And since it is possible, we have to rethink everything that we have been planning.

This photo illustration shows the DeepSeek app on a mobile phone in Beijing
Related article
What is DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup that shook the tech world?

Suddenly, all that money and computing power that the Sam Altmans, Mark Zuckerbergs and Elon Musks have been saying are crucial to their AI projects  and thus Americas continued leadership in the industry  may end up being wildly overblown.

DeepSeek, which on Monday climbed to No. 1 on the Apple app store, claims to have built its base model for less than $6 million (versus the more than $100 million Altman has said it cost to build GPT-4).

It also claims to have used just 2,000 Nvidia chips that it obtained before US export restrictions were put in place. (OpenAI says it used 25,000 of the more powerful Nvidia H100 chips to build GPT-4.)

Its awkward timing for the Trump administration, which last week announced a half-trillion-dollar private-sector investment to build more data centers and keep the United States ahead of China in the AI race. (Oops!)

And its incredibly bad news for Nvidia, the American chip maker powering the AI gold rush. Nvidia shares sank 17% Monday, shedding $600 billion in market cap in a single session  the biggest one-day loss for a single stock in history. Alphabet, Microsoft, Oracle, TSMC and plenty of others sank, and because tech stocks are so dominant, that dragged the broader stock market down, too.

The tech-heavy Nasdaq plunged by 3% and the broader S&P 500 fell 1.5%. (The Dow, buoyed by health care and consumer companies, ended the day up less than 1%.)

AI is over, long live AI
Of course, one bad day on Wall Street does not an apocalypse make. (Thats for later, when one of these AI labs creates superintelligent murder bots. Kidding! Kind of.)

But DeepSeek is forcing investors to take a beat and question tech companies assumptions. By its own reasoning, the AI industry needed to keep increasing compute (or computational power), which meant buying tens of thousands of Nvidias state-of-the-art chips and building giant data centers.

DeepSeek makes it very clear that that the current trajectory of scaling up of data centers is highly unlikely to be economic to Nvidias customers, Luria said.

The AI industry, and OpenAI in particular, has been going down two paths at once.

Theres the business of designing AI models with better algorithms and sounder reasoning  the kind of stuff that requires finesse, as opposed to brute force, Luria says. And then theres the Stargate path of giant energy investments.

The first task is still valid and important, while the second path looks ridiculous, Luria said. DeepSeek makes it clear that that scale and that spend would be, at the very least, wasteful.

In other words, AI isnt dead. But the landscape is shifting faster than anyone, perhaps most of all Nvidia, expected.

Picks and shovels
Nvidia has become the ultimate picks and shovels play on Wall Street, transforming it into a $3 trillion company in the span of a couple of years. Up until now, the demand for Nvidia chips appeared boundless  tech companies were going to keep gobbling them up faster than Nvidia could produce them.

But if DeepSeek really did manage to build a ChatGPT competitor using a handful of old processors, then maybe Nvidias tech customers soon wont need as many as theyd thought. Many on Wall Street seemed to think so Monday as the stock went into a tailspin. (For its part, Nvidia seemed to shrug at the selloff in a statement to Bloomberg, calling DeepSeeks model an excellent AI advancement that illustrates how new models can be created.)

Its also good to keep in mind that Wall Street is prone to tantrums, which is how some tech investors chalked up Mondays selloff.

At the end of the day, there is only one chip company in the world launching autonomous, robotics, and broader AI use cases, and that is Nvidia, Wedbush analysts wrote in a letter to clients. Launching a competitive LLM model for consumer use cases is one thing launching broader AI infrastructure is a whole other ballgame, and nothing with DeepSeek makes us believe anything different.
