China celebrates DeepSeeks breakout AI success as tech race heats up

People across China are hailing the success of homegrown tech startup DeepSeek and its founder, after the companys newest artificial intelligence model sent shock waves through Silicon Valley and Wall Street.

DeepSeek overturns the US stocks overnight one trending hashtag with tens of millions of views proclaimed on Chinese social media platform Weibo. DeepSeek makes Meta panic, said another, in reference to the US tech giant thats invested heavily in developing its own AI models.

More than a dozen hashtags related to the cutting-edge technology were trending on Weibo early this week as DeepSeek surged to the top of international app store charts, surpassing American company OpenAIs ChatGPT on Monday.

DeepSeek founder Liang Wenfeng was also hailed as a tech visionary who could help China usher in a culture of innovation to rival that of Silicon Valley.

The engineer-turned-entrepreneur, who rarely gives interviews, is known for hiring only domestic talent and keeping his AI models open source, allowing other companies or users to test and build upon the model.

Liang, a co-founder of AI-oriented hedge fund High-Flyer Quant, founded DeepSeek in 2023. The startups newest model DeepSeek R1, unveiled on January 20, can nearly match the capabilities of its far more famous American rivals, including OpenAIs GPT-4, Metas Llama and Googles Gemini. However, it cost less than $6 million to build, the company claims  a fraction of the investment from those other firms.

Famed tech investor Marc Andreessen hailed the model as a Sputnik moment and US President Donald Trump on Monday called the breakthrough a wake-up call for America in its rivalry with China. Technological dominance, especially in AI, has become a key battleground between the two powers, with the US in recent years limiting Chinese firms access to chips that could power rapid AI development.

Analysts say that more information is needed to verify DeepSeeks claims about its products pricetag and point out that the app operates within the stringent restrictions on speech and information imposed by the Chinese government. That means its AI assistants answers to questions on the Tiananmen Square massacre or Hong Kongs pro-democracy protests will mirror Beijings line  or a response will be declined altogether.

But for many in China, the success of the technology  and Liangs vision and ethos for DeepSeek  mark a significant step forward for the country in a competitive international arena.

No matter how powerful the old guard is, they may be overturned overnight, read one triumphant comment on Weibo with over a thousand likes.

(Liangs) achievements  can be called a national destiny, another read.

CNN has reached out to Liang, DeepSeek and High-Flyer Quant for comment.

Changing the rules of the game
Born in the 1980s as the son of a primary school teacher, Liang grew up in a small city in Chinas southern province of Guangdong. He went on to study information and electronic engineering at Zhejiang University, a prestigious school in Chinas eastern tech hub Hangzhou, according to Chinese state media.

Early business associates interviewed by state-linked financial outlet Yicai in recent days remembered the future DeepSeek founder as a bit nerdy and recalled a terrible haircut he sported in the past.

Liang talked about his idea of training large AI models and changing the rules of the game, but no one took him seriously, the outlet reported, without naming the early associates. Such feats were typically only deemed possible for Chinas tech giants like ByteDance or Alibaba, it said.

Liang co-founded his AI-oriented hedge fund High-Flyer Quant in 2015, less than decade after he finished his undergraduate studies, according to state media reports. The fund incorporates AI machine learning models into its operations, according to the companys website.

Traders and financial professionals work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) during the first session of the new year on January 2, 2025, in New York City.
Related article
A shocking Chinese AI advancement called DeepSeek is sending US stocks plunging

At the same time, the firm was amassing computing power into a basketball courtsized AI supercomputer, becoming among the top companies in China in terms of processing capabilities  and the only one that was not a major tech giant, according to state-linked outlet The Paper.

In 2023, Liang founded DeepSeek, with a focus on advancing the field of general artificial intelligence  and, apparently, revamping Chinas culture around innovation.

We often say theres a one or two-year gap between China and the US, but the real gap is between originality and imitation. If this doesnt change, China will always be a follower, Liang said in a rare media interview with the finance and tech-focused Chinese media outlet 36Kr last July.

The rise of DeepSeek roughly coincides with the wind-down of a heavy-handed state crackdown on the countrys tech giants by authorities seeking to re-assert control over a cohort of innovative private firms that had grown too powerful in the governments eyes.

But Beijing has also placed tremendous emphasis on cultivating technological prowess, with Chinese leaders vowing over the past year to boost self-reliance and strength in technology  especially in the face of mounting tech competition with the United States.

Liang appeared to reference difficulties posed by US tech export controls  saying in the 36Kr interview last year that his companys challenges have not been about money, but the embargo on high-end chips.

But he also expressed optimism about Chinas ability to compete in the future.

When society allows hardcore innovators to succeed, collective thinking will change. We just need more concrete examples and processes, Liang told the outlet.

We dont do mediocre
The company, which has teams in Beijing and Hangzhou, has remained small, with just under 140 researchers and engineers, according to state media  a far cry from the large firms both in China and the US that have led the creation of AI models.

DeepSeeks employees have been recruited domestically, Liang said in the same interview last year, describing his team as fresh graduates and doctorate students from top Chinese universities.

The top 50 talents may not be in China, but maybe we can create such people ourselves, he told 36Kr, noting that the work is divided naturally by who has what strengths. Innovation first requires confidence. This confidence is usually more obvious in young people, he added.

This photo illustration shows the DeepSeek app on a mobile phone in Beijing
Related article
What is DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup that shook the tech world?

Zihan Wang, a former DeepSeek employee now studying in the US, told MIT Technology Review in an interview published this month that the company offered a luxury that few fresh graduates would get at any company - access to abundant computing resources and the freedom to experiment.

The whole team shared a collaborative culture around research, Wang said.

Active recruitment ads on the DeepSeek website and major job seeking sites show the company hiring deep learning researchers, engineers, and user interface designers.

Among them, the highest paid engineers positions are listed with a monthly salary range of up to 90,000 yuan ($12,400). By comparison, the higher end of the base pay for a Google software engineer is upwards of $29,000, according to tech industry salary insight platform levels.fyi.

A post on DeepSeeks official Wechat social media account declares that the companys devotion is to exploring the essence of AGI or artificial general intelligence. We dont do mediocre things and answer the biggest questions with curiosity and a far-reaching vision, the post added.

