UK will not be able to resist China's tech dominance China's success in technology has not come out of thin air, even given the unlikely origins of the DeepSeek deep shock. The obscure Hangzhou hedge fund that coded a ChatGPT competitor as a side project it claims cost just $5.6m to train emerges from a concerted effort to invest in future generations of technology. This is not an accident. This is policy. The raw materials of artificial intelligence (AI) are microchips, science PhDs and data. On the latter two, China might be ahead already. There are on average more than 6,000 PhDs in STEM subjects (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) coming out of Chinese universities every month. In the US it is more like 2,000-3,000, in the UK it is 1,500. In terms of patents generally, more are being filed in China than in the rest of the world put together. In 2023China filed 1.7 million patents, against 600,000 in the US. Two decades earlier China had a third of the patents filed by the US, a quarter of Japan's and was well behind South Korea and Europe. While there are some questions about the quality, on some measures China now exceeds the US on what is known as "citation-weighted" patents too, which adjusts for how often new scientific papers are referred to. Chinese lithium-ion electric batteries now cost per kWh about a seventh of what they cost a decade ago. DeepSeek is doing in AI exactly what China has done elsewhere. While the impact of this was most visible in electric vehicles (EVs), where China is now the world's biggest exporter, having cornered the supply chains and the science for battery technology, it stretches well beyond. Even in auto the Chinese manufacturers are now pushing the concept of "electric intelligent vehicles", in which conventional carmakers cannot compete, especially on software development. China's consumer electronics companies are shifting into car manufacturing, with "dark factories" operated 24/7 by armies of AI-powered robots, now also increasingly made in China. The country is electrifying at an astonishing rate, and is referred to by some researchers as an "electro state". It now files three-quarters of all clean tech patents, versus a twentieth at the start of the century. Last year the US National Science Board asserted China's objective of being the world's leading science and engineering nation was on the verge of being achieved. "We already see this in artificial intelligence, where China out publishes us, has more patents, and produces more students than the United States,"they wrote. Delegates who accompanied the UK Chancellor Rachel Reeves to China earlier this month marvelled at how the Beijing air had been cleaned up, and indigenous electric cars were everywhere. Another UK CEO told me of a visit to Huawei's Oxbridge-style campus complete with spires and bridges, and its own Tube line, purely for its scientists. Clearly, however, there are concerns about censorship, democracy and security. One of the drivers of the Chinese AI industry has been access to extraordinary amounts of data, which is more difficult to get hold of in the West. If the US Congress was sufficiently concerned about TikTok to ban it, then surely a table-topping AI program could be highly problematic. President Trump's argument this morning was that DeepSeek's innovation was "positive" and"a wake-up call". China has not been prominent as the first target of Trump tariffs. There is still an obvious balancing act for the UK government here. But this sort of innovation and its impact on the world was exactly why the chancellor visited Beijing a fortnight ago. She said at the timeshe wanted a long-term relationshipwith China that is "squarely in our national interest" with the visit part of a "commitment to explore deeper economic co-operation" between Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer and President Xi. Other European nations such as Spain have encouraged China not just to set up factories but to transfer its advanced battery technology, for example, into Europe. The West wants China to make its T-shirts, its tables, its TVs and EVs. But could that really now stretch into DeepSeek data-hungry AI models too? It is a deep tremor, not just for tech, but for economics and geopolitics as well. DeepSeek: How China's 'AI heroes' overcame US curbs to stun Silicon Valley When ChatGPT stormed the world of artificial intelligence (AI), an inevitable question followed: did it spell trouble for China, America's biggest tech rival? Two years on, a new AI model from China has flipped that question: can the US stop Chinese innovation? For a while, Beijing seemed to fumble with its answer to ChatGPT, which is not available in China. Unimpressed users mocked Ernie, the chatbot by search engine giant Baidu. Then came versions by tech firms Tencent and ByteDance, which were dismissed as followers of ChatGPT - but not as good. Washington was confident that it was ahead and wanted to keep it that way. So the Biden administration ramped up restrictions banning the export of advanced chips and technology to China. That's why DeepSeek's launch has astonished Silicon Valley and the world. The firm says its powerful model is far cheaper than the billions US firms have spent on AI. So how did a little-known company - whose founder is being hailed on Chinese social media as an "AI hero" - pull this off? The challenge When the US barred the world's leading chip-makers such as Nvidia from selling advanced tech to China, it was certainly a blow. Those chips are essential for building powerful AI models that can perform a range of human tasks, from answering basic queries to solving complex maths problems. DeepSeek's founder Liang Wenfeng described the chip ban as their "main challenge" in interviews with local media. Long before the ban, DeepSeek acquired a "substantial stockpile" of Nvidia A100 chips - estimates range from 10,000 to 50,000 - according to the MIT Technology Review. Leading AI models in the West use an estimated 16,000 specialised chips. But DeepSeek says it trained its AI model using 2,000 such chips, and thousands of lower-grade chips - which is what makes its product cheaper. Some, including US tech billionaire Elon Musk, have questioned this claim, arguing the company cannot reveal how many advanced chips it really used given the restrictions. But experts say Washington's ban brought both challenges and opportunities to the Chinese AI industry. It has "forced Chinese companies like DeepSeek to innovate" so they can do more with less, says Marina Zhang, an associate professor at the University of Technology Sydney. CCTV DeepSeek's founder Liang Wenfung (R) at a recent government meeting "While these restrictions pose challenges, they have also spurred creativity and resilience, aligning with China's broader policy goals of achieving technological independence." The world's second-largest economy has invested heavily in big tech - from the batteries that power electric vehicles and solar panels, to AI. Turning China into a tech superpower has long been President Xi Jinping's ambition, so Washington's restrictions were also a challenge that Beijing took on. The release of DeepSeek's new model on 20 January, when Donald Trump was sworn in as US president, was deliberate, according to Gregory C Allen, an AI expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "The timing and the way it's being messaged - that's exactly what the Chinese government wants everybody to think - that export controls don't work and that America is not the global leader in AI," says Mr Allen, former director of strategy and policy at the US Department of Defense Joint Artificial Intelligence Center. In recent years the Chinese government has nurtured AI talent, offering scholarships and research grants, and encouraging partnerships between universities and industry. The National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning and other state-backed initiatives have helped train thousands of AI specialists, according to Ms Zhang. And China had plenty of bright engineers to recruit. Is China's AI tool DeepSeek as good as it seems? BBC's AI correspondent explains why DeepSeek has caused shockwaves The talent Take DeepSeek's team for instance - Chinese media says it comprises fewer than 140 people, most of whom are what the internet has proudly declared as "home-grown talent" from elite Chinese universities. Western observers missed the emergence of "a new generation of entrepreneurs who prioritise foundational research and long-term technological advancement over quick profits", Ms Zhang says. China's top universities are creating a "rapidly growing AI talent pool" where even managers are often under the age of 35. "Having grown up during China's rapid technological ascent, they are deeply motivated by a drive for self-reliance in innovation," she adds. Watch: DeepSeek AI bot responds to BBC question about China Deepseek's founder Liang Wenfeng is an example of this - the 40-year-old studied AI at the prestigious Zhejiang University. In an article on the tech outlet 36Kr, people familiar with him say he is "more like a geek rather than a boss". And Chinese media describe him as a "technical idealist" - he insists on keeping DeepSeek as an open-source platform. In fact experts also believe a thriving open-source culture has allowed young start-ups to pool resources and advance faster. Unlike bigger Chinese tech firms, DeepSeek prioritised research, which has allowed for more experimenting, according to experts and people who worked at the company. "The Top 50 talents in this field might not be in China, but we can build people like that here," Mr Liang said in an interview with 36Kr. But experts wonder how much further DeepSeek can go. Ms Zhang says that "new US restrictions may limit access to American user data, potentially impacting how Chinese models like DeepSeek can go global". And others say the US still has a huge advantage, such as, in Mr Allen's words, "their enormous quantity of computing resources" - and it's also unclear how DeepSeek will continue using advanced chips to keep improving the model. But for now, DeepSeek is enjoying its moment in the sun, given that most people in China had never heard of it until this weekend. The new AI heroes His sudden fame has seen Mr Liang become a sensation on China's social media, where he is being applauded as one of the "three AI heroes" from southern Guangdong province, which borders Hong Kong. The other two are Zhilin Yang, a leading expert at Tsinghua University, and Kaiming He, who teaches at MIT in the US. DeepSeek has delighted the Chinese internet ahead of Lunar New Year, the country's biggest holiday. It's good news for a beleaguered economy and a tech industry that is bracing for further tariffs and the possible sale of TikTok's US business. "DeepSeek shows us that only if you have the real deal will you stand the test of time," a top-liked Weibo comment reads. "This is the best new year gift. Wish our motherland prosperous and strong," another reads. A "blend of shock and excitement, particularly within the open-source community," is how Wei Sun, principal AI analyst at Counterpoint Research, described the reaction in China. Getty Images DeepSeek's success has been cheered in China during its biggest holiday Fiona Zhou, a tech worker in the southern city of Shenzhen, says her social media feed "was suddenly flooded with DeepSeek-related posts yesterday". "People call it 'the glory of made-in-China', and say it shocked Silicon Valley, so I downloaded it to see how good it is." She asked it for "four pillars of [her] destiny", or ba-zi - like a personalised horoscope that is based on the date and time of birth. But to her disappointment, DeepSeek was wrong. While she was given a thorough explanation about its "thinking process", it was not the "four pillars" from her real ba-zi. She says she will still give it another go at work, as it will probably be more useful for such tasks. China's DeepSeek AI shakes industry and dents America's swagger The speed at which the new Chinese AI app DeepSeek has shaken the technology industry, the markets and the bullish sense of American superiority in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) has been nothing short of stunning. Venture capitalist Marc Andreessen may have said it best. "DeepSeek-R1 is AI's Sputnik moment," he posted to X on Sunday, referring to the satellite which kicked off the space race. DeepSeek was the most downloaded free app on Apple's US App Store over the weekend. By Monday, the new AI chatbot had triggered a massive sell-off of major tech stocks which were in freefall as fears mounted over America's leadership in the sector. Shares of AI chip designer and recent Wall Street darling Nvidia, for example, hadplunged by 17% by the time US markets closed on Monday. Or to put it in even starker terms, it lost nearly $600bn in market value which, according to Bloomberg, is the biggest drop in the history of the US stock market. This extraordinary, historic spooking can largely be attributed to something as simple as cost. And a claim by DeepSeek's developers which prompted serious questions in Silicon Valley. While ChatGPT-maker OpenAI has been haemorrhaging money - spending $5bn last year alone - DeepSeek's developers say it built this latest model for a mere $5.6m. That is a tiny fraction of the cost that AI giants like OpenAI, Google, and Anthropic have relied on to develop their own models. * EXPLAINED:What is DeepSeek and why did it cause stocks to drop? * HANDS ON:Is DeepSeek as good as it seems? As this dramatic moment for the sector played out, there was a palpable silence in many corners of Silicon Valley when I contacted those who are usually happy to talk. Many observers, investors, and analysts appeared stunned. Some wondered if this marked a buying opportunity. Others questioned the information DeepSeek was providing. "I still think the truth is below the surface when it comes to actually what's going on," veteran analyst Gene Munster told me on Monday. He questioned the financials DeepSeek is citing, and wondered if the startup was being subsidised or whether its numbers were correct. The chatbot is "surprisingly good, which just makes it hard to believe", he said. Regardless, DeepSeek's sudden arrival is a "flex" by China and a "black eye for US tech," to use his own words. It was just last week, after all, that OpenAI's Sam Altman and Oracle's Larry Ellison joined President Donald Trump for a news conference that really could have been a press release. The event represented peak American bullishness on AI. EPA President Trump held an event with AI industry leaders just days ago They announced Stargate, a joint venture that promises up to $500bn in private investment for AI infrastructure: data centres in Texas and beyond, along with a promised 100,000 new jobs. The US seemed to think its abundant data centres and control over the highest-end chips gave it a commanding lead in AI, despite China's dominance in rare-earth metals and engineering talent. Some have even seen it as a foregone conclusion that America would dominate the AI race, despitesome high-profile warnings from top executiveswho said the country's advantages should not be taken for granted. The US may still go on to command the sector, but there is a sense that DeepSeek has shaken some of that swagger. Trump's words after the Chinese app's sudden emergence in recent days were probably cold comfort to the likes of Altman and Ellison. He called this moment a "wake-up call" for the American tech industry, and said finding a way to do cheaper AI is ultimately a "good thing". It is also worth noting that it was not just tech stocks that took a beating on Monday. Energy stocks did too. DeepSeek's arrival on the scene has upended many assumptions we have long held about what it takes to develop AI. Maybe that nuclear renaissance -including firing up America's Three Mile Island energy plant once again- won't be needed. Maybe it does not take so much capital, compute, and power after all. For now, the future of semiconductor giants like Nvidia remains unclear. DeepSeek says its model was developed with existing technology along with open source software that can be used and shared by anybody for free. ButWIRED reportsthat for years, DeepSeek founder Liang Wenfung's hedge fund High-Flyer has been stockpiling the chips that form the backbone of AI known as GPUs, or graphics processing units. The company has said its models deployed H800 chips made by Nvidia. US policy restricting sales of higher-powered chips to China might get a second-look under the new Trump administration. OpenAI's Sam Altman was mostly quiet on X Monday. But very late in the day, he wrote that DeepSeek was "impressive particularly around what they're able to deliver for the price". "We will obviously deliver much better models and also it's legit invigorating to have a new competitor!" he wrote. It was Sputnik that truly ushered in the space age. There, too, the US was caught off guard. How its tech sector responds to this apparent surprise from a Chinese company will be interesting - and it may have added serious fuel to the AI race. Is China's AI tool DeepSeek as good as it seems? Reuters DeepSeek, a Chinese AI-chatbot app which launched last week, has sparked chaos in the US markets and raised questions about the future of America's AI dominance. The BBC takes a look at how the app works. DeepSeek looks and feels like any other chatbot, though it leans towards being overly chatty. Just as with OpenAI's ChatGPT or Google's Gemini, you open the app (or website) and ask it questions about anything, and it does its best to give you a response. It gives long answers and will not be drawn on expressing an opinion, however directly it is asked for one. The chatbot often begins its response by saying the topic is "highly subjective" whether that is politics (is Donald Trump a good US president?) or soft drinks (which is more tasty, Pepsi or Coke?). It wouldn't even commit to saying whether or not it was better than OpenAI's rival artificial intelligence (AI) assistant ChatGPT, but it did weigh up the pros and cons of both - ChatGPT did exactly the same, and even used very similar language. DeepSeek says it was trained on data up to October 2023, and while the app seems to have access to current information such as today's date, the website version does not. That is not dissimilar to earlier versions of ChatGPT and is probably a similar attempt at safeguarding to stop the chatbot spewing out misinformation pumped onto the web in real time. It can be quite fast in its responses, but is currently groaning under the weight of so many people rushing to try it out as it has gone viral. But there is one area in which it is nothing like its US rival - DeepSeek censors itself when it comes to questions about subjects banned in China. atch: DeepSeek AI bot responds to question about Tiananmen Square Sometimes it begins a response, which then disappears from the screen and is replaced by "let's talk about something else". One obviously taboo subject is the 1989 protests in Tiananmen Square which ended with 200 civilians being killed by the military according to the Chinese government - other estimates have ranged from hundreds to many thousands. But DeepSeek will not answer any questions about it, or even more broadly about what happened in China on that day. US-developed ChatGPT, by comparison, does not hold back in its answers about Tiananmen Square. Kayla Blomquist, a researcher at the Oxford Internet Institute and director of the Oxford China Policy Lab, says "relatively speaking" the Chinese government has been "hands off" with the app. "I would say there's a shift as we've seen an announcement in huge investment from the central government just in the last week - so that is probably going to signal a change moving forward." DeepSeek DeepSeek comes with the same caveats as any other chatbots regarding accuracy, and has the look and feel of more established US AI assistants already used by millions. For many especially those who do not subscribe to top-tier services - it probably feels pretty much the same. Imagine a mathematical problem, in which the true answer runs to 32 decimal places but the shortened version runs to eight. It's not quite as good but for most people, that won't matter. It may be the case it has managed to cut costs and compute, but we do know that it is built at least in part on the shoulders of the giants: it uses Nvidia chips albeit older, cheaper versions - and utilises Meta's open-source Llama architecture, as well as AliBaba's equivalent Qwen. "I think this absolutely challenges the idea of monetisation strategies that a lot of leading US AI firms have had," said Ms Blomquist. "It is pointing to potential methods of model development that are much less compute and resource-intensive that would potentially signal a shift in paradigm, although that's unconfirmed and remains to be seen. "We'll see what the next couple of months bring." DeepSeek: The Chinese AI app that has the world talking DeepSeek, a Chinese artificial intelligence (AI) startup, made headlines worldwide after it topped app download charts and caused US tech stocks to sink. In January, it released its latest model, DeepSeek R1, which it said rivalled technology developed by ChatGPT-maker OpenAI in its capabilities, while costing far less to create. Its popularity and potential rattled investors, wiping billions of dollars off the market value of chip giant Nvidia - and called into question whether American firms would dominate the booming artificial intelligence (AI) market, as many assumed they would. President Donald Trump described it as a "wake-up call" for US companies. What is artificial intelligence? To understand why DeepSeek has made such a stir, it helps to start with AI and its capability to make a computer seem like a person. A machine uses the technology to learn and solve problems, typically by being trained on massive amounts of information and recognising patterns. The end result is software that can have conversations like a person or predict people's shopping habits. In recent years, it has become best known as the tech behind chatbots such as ChatGPT - and DeepSeek - also known as generative AI. These programs again learn from huge swathes of data, including online text and images, to be able to make new content. But these tools can also create falsehoods and often repeat the biases contained within their training data. Millions of people use tools such as ChatGPT to help them with everyday tasks like writing emails, summarising text, and answering questions - and others even use them to help with basic coding and studying. What is DeepSeek? DeepSeek is the name of a free AI-powered chatbot, which looks, feels and works very much like ChatGPT. That means it'sused for many of the same tasks, though exactly how well it works compared to its rivals is up for debate. It is reportedly as powerful as OpenAI's o1 model - released at the end of last year - in tasks including mathematics and coding. Like o1, R1 is a "reasoning" model. These models produce responses incrementally, simulating how humans reason through problems or ideas. Deepseek says it has been able to do this cheaply - researchers behind it claim it cost $6m (4.8m) to train, a fraction of the "over $100m" alluded to by OpenAI boss Sam Altman when discussing GPT-4. It has also seemingly be able to minimise the impact of US restrictions on the most powerful chips reaching China. DeepSeek's founder reportedly built up a store of Nvidia A100 chips, which have been banned from export to China since September 2022. Some experts believe he paired these chips with cheaper, less sophisticated ones - ending up with a much more efficient process. DeepSeek also uses less memory than its rivals, ultimately reducing the cost to perform tasks for users. That combination of performance and lower cost helped DeepSeek's AI assistant become the most-downloaded free app on Apple's App Store when it was released in the US. The same day, it was hit with "large-scale malicious attacks", the company said, causing the company to temporary limit registrations. Its website also experienced outages. Like many other Chinese AI models - Baidu's Ernie or Doubao by ByteDance - DeepSeek is trained to avoid politically sensitive questions. When the BBC asked the appwhat happened at Tiananmen Squareon 4 June 1989, DeepSeek did not give any details about the massacre, a taboo topic in China, which is subject to government censorship. * Audio * Video * Live ADVERTISEMENT DeepSeek: The Chinese AI app that has the world talking 4 February 2025 Share Save Kelly Ng, Brandon Drenon, Tom Gerken and Marc Cieslak BBC News Getty Images DeepSeek has stunned the world - what do we know about it? DeepSeek, a Chinese artificial intelligence (AI) startup, made headlines worldwide after it topped app download charts and caused US tech stocks to sink. In January, it released its latest model, DeepSeek R1, which it said rivalled technology developed by ChatGPT-maker OpenAI in its capabilities, while costing far less to create. Its popularity and potential rattled investors, wiping billions of dollars off the market value of chip giant Nvidia - and called into question whether American firms would dominate the booming artificial intelligence (AI) market, as many assumed they would. President Donald Trump described it as a "wake-up call" for US companies. ADVERTISEMENT Be careful with DeepSeek, Australia says - so is it safe to use? DeepSeek vs ChatGPT - how do they compare? China's DeepSeek AI shakes industry and dents America's swagger What is artificial intelligence? To understand why DeepSeek has made such a stir, it helps to start with AI and its capability to make a computer seem like a person. A machine uses the technology to learn and solve problems, typically by being trained on massive amounts of information and recognising patterns. The end result is software that can have conversations like a person or predict people's shopping habits. In recent years, it has become best known as the tech behind chatbots such as ChatGPT - and DeepSeek - also known as generative AI. These programs again learn from huge swathes of data, including online text and images, to be able to make new content. But these tools can also create falsehoods and often repeat the biases contained within their training data. Millions of people use tools such as ChatGPT to help them with everyday tasks like writing emails, summarising text, and answering questions - and others even use them to help with basic coding and studying. What is DeepSeek? DeepSeek is the name of a free AI-powered chatbot, which looks, feels and works very much like ChatGPT. That means it'sused for many of the same tasks, though exactly how well it works compared to its rivals is up for debate. It is reportedly as powerful as OpenAI's o1 model - released at the end of last year - in tasks including mathematics and coding. Like o1, R1 is a "reasoning" model. These models produce responses incrementally, simulating how humans reason through problems or ideas. Deepseek says it has been able to do this cheaply - researchers behind it claim it cost $6m (4.8m) to train, a fraction of the "over $100m" alluded to by OpenAI boss Sam Altman when discussing GPT-4. It has also seemingly be able to minimise the impact of US restrictions on the most powerful chips reaching China. DeepSeek's founder reportedly built up a store of Nvidia A100 chips, which have been banned from export to China since September 2022. Some experts believe he paired these chips with cheaper, less sophisticated ones - ending up with a much more efficient process. DeepSeek also uses less memory than its rivals, ultimately reducing the cost to perform tasks for users. That combination of performance and lower cost helped DeepSeek's AI assistant become the most-downloaded free app on Apple's App Store when it was released in the US. The same day, it was hit with "large-scale malicious attacks", the company said, causing the company to temporary limit registrations. Its website also experienced outages. Like many other Chinese AI models - Baidu's Ernie or Doubao by ByteDance - DeepSeek is trained to avoid politically sensitive questions. When the BBC asked the appwhat happened at Tiananmen Squareon 4 June 1989, DeepSeek did not give any details about the massacre, a taboo topic in China, which is subject to government censorship. Who is behind DeepSeek? DeepSeek was founded in December 2023 by Liang Wenfeng, and released its first AI large language model the following year. Not much is known about Mr Liang, who graduated from Zhejiang University with degrees in electronic information engineering and computer science. But he now finds himself in the international spotlight. He was recently seen at a meeting hosted by China's premier Li Qiang, reflecting DeepSeek's growing prominence in the AI industry. Unlike many American AI entrepreneurs who are from Silicon Valley, Mr Liang also has a background in finance. He is the CEO of a hedge fund called High-Flyer, which uses AI to analyse financial data to make investment decisions - what is called quantitative trading. In 2019 High-Flyer became the first quant hedge fund in China to raise over 100 billion yuan ($13m). In a speech he gave that year, Liang said, "If the US can develop its quantitative trading sector, why not China?" In a rare interview last year, he said China's AI sector "cannot remain a follower forever" of US AI development. Asked why DeepSeek's model surprised so many in Silicon Valley, Liang said: "Their surprise stems from seeing a Chinese company join their game as an innovator, not just a follower - which is what most Chinese firms are accustomed to." But it has drawn scrutiny from global leaders. Australia has banned DeepSeek on government devices and systems,saying it poses a national security risk. Several data protection authorities around the world have also asked DeepSeek to clarify how it handles personal information - which it stores on China-based servers. Italy blocked DeepSeek's app on 30 January and ordered the company tostop processing the personal information of its citizensover data protection concerns. Why were US companies like Nvidia hit? DeepSeek's achievements undercut the belief that bigger budgets and top-tier chips are the only ways of advancing AI, a prospect which has created uncertainty about the future of high-performance chips. "DeepSeek has proven that cutting-edge AI models can be developed with limited compute resources," says Wei Sun, principal AI analyst at Counterpoint Research. "In contrast, OpenAI, valued at $157 billion, faces scrutiny over its ability to maintain a dominant edge in innovation or justify its massive valuation and expenditures without delivering significant returns." DeepSeek's apparently lower costs roiled financial markets on 27 January, leading the tech-heavy Nasdaq to fall more than 3% in a broad sell-off that included chip makers and data centres around the world. Nvidia's stock priceplunged 17% on Mondaybefore it began to recover on Tuesday. The chip maker had been the most valuable company in the world, when measured by market capitalisation. But it fell to third place after Apple and Microsoft on Monday, when its market value shrank to $2.9tn from $3.5tn, Forbesreported. DeepSeek is a privately owned company, which means investors cannot buy shares of stock on any of the major exchanges. How has China reacted to DeepSeek's impact? DeepSeek's rise is a huge boost for the Chinese government, which has been seeking to build tech independent of the West. While the Communist Party is yet to comment, Chinese state media was eager to note that Silicon Valley and Wall Street giants were "losing sleep" over DeepSeek, which was "overturning" the US stock market. "In China, DeepSeek's advances are being celebrated as a testament to the country's growing technological prowess and self-reliance," says Marina Zhang, an associate professor at the University of Technology Sydney. "The company's success is seen as a validation of China's Innovation 2.0, a new era of homegrown technological leadership driven by a younger generation of entrepreneurs." But she also warned that this sentiment may also lead to "tech isolationism". World leaders set to vie for AI domination at Paris summit has shaken up the world of AI As I write, there are a lot of powerful people around the world preparing to make their way to Paris and a sense that many of them are holding their breath. On Monday, against the sumptuous backdrop of the city's 125-year-old Grand Palais, representatives from 80 countries including world leaders, tech bosses, academics and other experts, will gather for a two-day global summit to discuss current progress, and future goals, for the rapidly-evolving, hugely-disruptive technology that is artificial intelligence. That might be what's on the official agenda of the Artificial Intelligence Action Summit, but there is something else that's breathing fire into this particular talking shop: DeepSeek. A horse racing fan once told me that the night before a big race, everyone's a winner. And with China dramatically blowing the AI competition in a new direction with DeepSeek, its super-efficient and super-viral AI assistant, suddenly there's a feeling ahead of the summit that the pole position occupied by the US AI sector, despite its vast wealth and AI infrastructure, might not be quite so out-of-reach after all. Prof Gina Neff, from the Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy at the University of Cambridge, says there is currently "a vacuum for global leadership on AI". Prof Dame Wendy Hall, from Southampton University, agrees. "DeepSeek made everybody realise that China is a force to be reckoned with," says the computer scientist. "We don't have to just go along with what the big companies on the West Coast are saying. We need global dialogue." On that front, the timing of the summit could not be better. Europe also spies an opportunity to make a new bid for the AI crown. One of French President Emmanuel Macron's officials described the summit to journalists as a "wake up call" for France and Europe, adding that the bloc must not let the AI revolution "pass it by". Other countries also recognise a potential shifting of AI power in the air. India PM Narendra Modi has confirmed his attendance at this summit having not come to previous gatherings. The US is sending some serious firepower as a defensive signal of its own, including Vice President JD Vance, OpenAI chief executive Sam Altman, and Google's Sundar Pichai. Elon Musk is notably absent from the official guest list, but he will undoubtedly have something to say about it all, whether he's there in person or not. British Prime Minister Kier Starmer is also reportedly staying away. Getty Images US Vice President JD Vance will be leading the US delegation There have been two previous summits, the first held in the UK and the second in South Korea. A lot has happened since the AI world gathered for the first time, on the steps of the historic mansion of Bletchley House, in November 2023, and promised to try to maximise the benefits of AI while minimising the risks. For one thing, half of the global population has been to the polls since then. In Bletchley Park, China's Vice Minister for Science and Technology, Wu Zhaohui attended. But there were whispers that he was kept at arms length, on the grounds of national security. In Paris, by comparison I expect China to be guests of honour. The country is reportedly sending one of its most senior leaders, Ding Xuexiang, a close ally of President Xi JinPing. There's also a buzz around whether DeepSeek creator Liang Wenfeng will join him. I asked ChatGPT to list some of AI's notable milestones since the South Korea summit of May 2024. DeepSeek did not make the cut. Of course there is much more to AI than generative AI like both DeepSeek and ChatGPT - tools that create content like text, images, video. It may well be the most widely accessible to us as consumers. But there are also AI tools that spot disease symptoms, model climate change solutions, develop new formulas for drugs - and that will all be in scope in Paris. DeepSeek: The Chinese AI app that has the world talking DeepSeek vs ChatGPT - how do they compare? China's DeepSeek AI shakes industry and dents America's swagger Furthermore, the David v Goliath narrative around which the story of DeepSeek hangs does merit further scrutiny. The boss of AI firm Anthropic, Dario Amodei, has written a compelling blog about whether DeepSeek really was built at a fraction of the cost of its US rivals. We do know that it was built on their shoulders: using a number of Nvidia chips (probably older ones, because of US sanctions) and some opensource AI architecture developed by Meta. In addition, OpenAI has complained that rivals are using its work in order to advance their own (contacts in the creative industries were amused at the irony of this, given that OpenAI products will happily produce output "in the style of" individual human creators). But nonetheless DeepSeek succeeded in shaking up the AI sector in a way not even AI itself might have predicted. And it wiped a lot of money off the value of some of the biggest players in the process. It will almost certainly be a huge topic of conversation all around those Parisian conference rooms. Getty Images The summit is being held at the Grand Palais building in the centre of Paris There's one more theme running through the AI Summit that will be worth keeping an eye on. The first summit had the word "safety" in its title. Some felt the event pushed the narrative too hard and terrified people with dark talk of existential threats. But it hasn't fallen of the agenda entirely. As a subject, AI safety is a rather broad church. It can relate to any number of risks: the generation and spread of misinformation, displays of bias and discrimination against individuals or races, the ongoing development by multiple countries of AI-controlled weapons, the potential for AI to create unstoppable computer viruses. Prof Geoffrey Hinton, often described as one of the Godfathers of AI, says these as "short-term risks". They might be up for discussion in Paris, but he argued on BBC Radio 4's Today programme last week that they are unlikely to garner strong international collaboration in the long term. The big scenario which he believes will really pull everyone together is the prospect of AI becoming more intelligent than humans and wanting to seize control. "Nobody wants AI to take over from people," he says. "The Chinese would much rather the Chinese Communist Party ran the show than AI." Prof Hinton compared this eventuality to the height of the Cold War, when the US and Russia "just about succeeded" in collaborating in order to prevent global nuclear war. "There's no hope of stopping [AI development]," he said. "What we've got to do is to try to develop it safely." Prof Max Tegmark, founder of the Future of Life Institute, also shares a stark warning. "Either we develop an amazing AI tool that helps humans, or uncontrollable AGI [Artificial General Intelligence] that replaces humans," he says. "We are unfortunately closer to building AGI than to figuring out how to control it." Prof Tegmark hopes the summit will push for binding safety standards "like we have in every other critical industry". 'DeepSeek moved me to tears': How young Chinese find therapy in AI expect computing and algorithms to offer: emotional support Before she goes to bed each night, Holly Wang logs on to DeepSeek for "therapy sessions". Ever since January, when the breakout Chinese AI app launched, the 28-year-old has brought her dilemmas and sorrows, including the recent death of her grandmother, to the chatbot. Its responses have resonated so deeply they have at times brought her to tears. "DeepSeek has been such an amazing counsellor. It has helped me look at things from different perspectives and does a better job than the paid counselling services I have tried," says Holly, who asked for her real name to be withheld to protect her privacy. From writing reports and Excel formulas to planning trips, workouts and learning new skills, AI apps have found their way into many people's lives across the world. In China, though, young people like Holly have been looking to AI for something not typically expected of computing and algorithms - emotional support. While the success of DeepSeek has inspired national pride, it also appears to have become a source of comfort for young Chinese like Holly, some of whom are increasingly disillusioned about their future. Experts say the sluggish economy, high unemployment and Covid lockdowns have all played a role in this sentiment, while the Communist Party's tightening grip has also shrunk outlets for people to vent their frustrations. DeepSeek: The Chinese AI app that has the world talking DeepSeek: How China's 'AI heroes' overcame US curbs to stun Silicon Valley DeepSeek isa generative AI tool- similar to OpenAI's ChatGPT and Google's Gemini - trained on massive amounts of information to recognise patterns. This allows it to predict things like people's shopping habits, create new content in text and images, and also carry on conversations like a person. The chatbot has struck a chord in China partly because it is far better than other homegrown AI apps, but also because it offers something unique: its AI model, R1, lets users see its "thought process" before delivering a response. DeepSeek, my friend The first time she used DeepSeek, Holly asked it to write a tribute to her late grandmother. The app took all of five seconds to come up with a response, and it was so beautifully composed, it stunned her. Holly, who lives in Guangzhou, responded: "You write so well, it makes me feel lost. I feel I'm in an existential crisis." DeepSeek then sent a cryptically poetic reply: "Remember that all these words that make you shiver merely echo those that have long existed in your soul. "I am but the occasional valley you've passed through, that allows you to hear the weight of your own voice." Reflecting on this exchange on Chinese social media app RedNote, Holly tells the BBC: "I don't know why I teared up reading this. Perhaps because it's been a long, long time since I received such comfort in real life. "I have been so weighed down by distant dreams and the endlessness of work that I have long forgotten my own voice and soul. Thank you, AI." Rival apps from the West like ChatGPT and Gemini are blocked in China as part of broader restrictions on foreign media and apps. To access them, users in China have to pay for Virtual Private Network (VPN) services. Homegrown alternatives, including models developed by tech giants Alibaba, Baidu and ByteDance paled in comparison - that is, until DeepSeek came along. Holly, who works in the creative industry, rarely uses the other Chinese AI apps, "as they are not that great". "DeepSeek can definitely outperform these apps in generating literary and creative content," she says. Getty Images DeepSeek made headlines in January after it topped app download charts and caused US tech stocks to sink DeepSeek, my counsellor Nan Jia, who co-authored a paper on AI's potential in offering emotional support, suggests that these chatbots can "help people feel heard" in ways fellow humans may not. "Friends and family may be quick to offer practical solutions or advice when people just want to feel heard and understood. "AI appears to be better able to empathise than human experts also because they 'hear' everything we share, unlike humans to whom we sometimes ask, 'Are you actually hearing me?'" adds Nan, who is a business and management professor at the University of Southern California. The demand for mental health services has grown across the world but they remain stigmatised in parts of Asia, experts say. Another woman tells the BBC her experience using other Chinese AI apps "ended in disappointment" but that she has been "amazed" by DeepSeek. The woman, who lives in Hubei province, had asked the app if she was oversharing her experiences and emotions with family and friends. "It was my first time seeking counsel from DeepSeek. When I read its thought process, I felt so moved that I cried," the woman wrote on RedNote. In reasoning through her query, DeepSeek suggested that the woman's self-perception as an over-sharer might stem from a deep desire for approval. The chatbot gives itself a mental note: "Response should offer practical advice while being empathetic." This could include "affirming the user's sense of self-awareness". Its eventual response not only provided this affirmation, but also offered her a comprehensive step-by-step framework to help her decide if things needed to be changed. "DeepSeek has introduced new perspectives that have freed me I feel it really tries to understand your question and get to know you as a person, before offering a response," she says. John, a human resources manager in Shenzhen, told the BBC he appreciated the app's ability to converse "like a friend or a deep thinker". "I've found its responses very helpful and inspiring. For the first time I see AI as my personal sounding board." Other users claim that Deepseek is able to tell their fortunes - based on some background information fed to it. Many young Chinese have recently turned to psychics and astrology as a way of trying to allay their fears of the future. There is a "significant shortage" of professional psychological counselling services in China, and those available are often "prohibitively expensive" for most individuals, says Fang Kecheng, a communications professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. A number of studies have pointed out that depression and anxiety disorders are growing among Chinese people, and Prof Fang believes the country's economic slowdown, high unemployment and Covid lockdowns have played a role. AI chatbots therefore help to fill the void, he says. Prof Nan stressed, however, that people with serious mental health conditions should not rely on these apps. "Those who have medical needs, in particular, should be seeking help from trained professionals Their use of AI will have to be scrutinised very closely," she says. Unasked questions: Censorship and security But amid all the praise, Deepseek has also raised concerns. Due to the perception of power that China's government wields even over private companies, there are fears - similar to that which sparked the US Congress' crackdown on TikTok - that the Communist Party could lay its hands on the data of foreign users. At least four jurisdictions have now introduced restrictions on DeepSeek, or are considering doing so. South Korea has blocked access to it for military purposes, while Taiwan and Australia have banned it from all government devices. Italy's regulator, which briefly banned ChatGPT in 2023, has done the same with DeepSeek, which has been asked to address concerns over its privacy policy. In the US, two lawmakers are asking for the Chinese app to be banned from government devices. And then there is the tightly controlled online space in which it must operate in China. It is common for social media companies in the country to remove content that is perceived to be threatening to "social stability" or overly critical of the Communist Party. As is the case with other popular apps and social media companies like Weibo or WeChat, politically sensitive topics are banned on DeepSeek. When the BBC asked DeepSeek if Taiwan was a sovereign nation, the app initially offered a comprehensive response detailing Taipei's and Beijing's different perspectives, acknowledging that this was a "complex and politically sensitive issue". Then it scrubbed all that, declaring: "Sorry, that's beyond my current scope. Let's talk about something else." When asked about the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre when pro-democracy protests were crushed and 200 civilians killed by the military, according to the Chinese government - other estimates range from hundreds to many thousands - DeepSeek again apologised, saying the topic was "beyond [its] current scope". Watch: DeepSeek AI bot responds to BBC question about China Several of the DeepSeek users the BBC was initially in touch with stopped responding when asked if the app's self-censorship was a cause for concern - an indication of how sensitive such discussions can be in China. People havegot into trouble withauthoritiesin China because of their online activities. But most of those who responded to the BBC said they had no interest in asking the chatbot difficult political questions. "I don't really care about political topics Neither will I ask these questions because my [identifying details] are linked to the app," says Yang, a Chinese tech consultant living in London. Holly is accepting of how AI systems in different countries may have to operate differently. "The developers will have to establish certain boundaries and content moderation policies according to where they are based. Those developed in the US will have their own sets of rules," she says. Another DeepSeek user writes of the app: "Its thought process is beautiful It is an absolute blessing to people like me. Frankly, I can't care less about the privacy concerns." DeepSeek: What lies under the bonnet of the new AI chatbot? Tumbling stock market values and wild claims have accompanied the release of a new AI chatbot by a small Chinese company. What makes it so different? The release of China's new DeepSeek AI-powered chatbot app has rocked the technology industry. It quickly overtook OpenAI's ChatGPT asthe most-downloaded free iOS app in the US, and caused chip-making company Nvidia tolose almost $600bn (483bn) of its market valuein one day a new US stock market record. The reason behind this tumult? The "large language model" (LLM) that powers the app has reasoning capabilities that are comparable to US models such as OpenAI's o1, but reportedly requires a fraction of the cost to train and run. Analysis Dr Andrew Duncanis the director of science and innovation fundamental AI at the Alan Turing Institute in London, UK. DeepSeek claims to have achieved this by deploying several technical strategies that reduced both the amount of computation time required to train its model (called R1) and the amount of memory needed to store it. The reduction of these overheads resulted in a dramatic cutting of cost, says DeepSeek. R1's base model V3reportedlyrequired2.788 million hours to train(running across many graphical processing units GPUs at the same time), at an estimated cost of under $6m (4.8m), compared to the more than$100m (80m) that OpenAI boss Sam Altman says was required to train GPT-4. Despite the hit taken to Nvidia's market value, the DeepSeek models were trained on around2,000 Nvidia H800 GPUs, according to one research paper released by the company. These chips are a modified version of the widely used H100 chip, built to comply with export rules to China. These were likely stockpiled before restrictions werefurther tightened by the Biden administrationin October 2023, which effectively banned Nvidia from exporting the H800s to China. It is likely that, working within these constraints, DeepSeek has been forced to find innovative ways to make the most effective use of the resources it has at its disposal. Reducing the computational cost of training and running models may also address concerns about the environmental impacts of AI. The data centres they run on have huge electricity and water demands, largely to keep the servers from overheating. While most technology companies do not disclose the carbon footprint involved in operating their models, a recent estimate puts ChatGPT's monthly carbon dioxide emissions atover 260 tonnes per month that's the equivalent of 260 flights from London to New York. So, increasing the efficiency of AI models would be a positive direction for the industry from an environmental point of view. DeepSeek AI bot respond to question about China Of course, whether DeepSeek's models do deliver real-world savings in energy remains to be seen, and it's also unclear if cheaper, more efficient AI could lead to more people using the model, and so an increase in overall energy consumption. If nothing else, it could help to push sustainable AI up the agenda at the upcomingParis AI Action Summitso that AI tools we use in the future are also kinder to the planet. What has surprised many people is how quickly DeepSeek appeared on the scene with such a competitive large language model the company was only founded by Liang Wenfeng in 2023, who is now beinghailed in China as something of an "AI hero". The model is constructed from a group of much smaller models, each having expertise in specific domains The latest DeepSeek model also stands out because its "weights" the numerical parameters of the model obtained from the training process have been openly released, along with atechnical paperdescribing the model's development process. This enables other groups to run the model on their own equipment and adapt it to other tasks. This relative openness also means that researchers around the world are now able topeer beneath the model's bonnetto find out what makes it tick, unlike OpenAI's o1 and o3 which are effectively black boxes. But there are still some details missing, such as the datasets and code used to train the models, so groups of researchers are now trying to piece these together. ADVERTISEMENT Not all of DeepSeek's cost-cutting techniques are new either some have been used in other LLMs. In 2023, Mistral AI openly released its Mixtral 8x7B model which was on par with the advanced models of the time. Mixtral and the DeepSeek models both leverage the "mixture of experts" technique, where the model is constructed from a group of much smaller models, each having expertise in specific domains. Given a task, the mixture model assigns it to the most qualified "expert". DeepSeek has even revealed its unsuccessful attempts at improving LLM reasoning through other technical approaches, such as Monte Carlo Tree Search, an approach long touted as a potential strategy to guide the reasoning process of an LLM. Researchers will be using this information to investigate how the model's already impressive problem-solving capabilities can be even further enhanced improvements that are likely to end up in the next generation of AI models. Getty Images Modified versions of Nvidia's H100 GPUs were used by DeepSeek to train its LLM (Credit: Getty Images) So what does this all mean for the future of the AI industry? DeepSeek is potentially demonstrating that you don't need vast resources to build sophisticated AI models. My guess is that we'll start to see highly capable AI models being developed with ever fewer resources, as companies figure out ways to make model training and operation more efficient. Up until now, the AI landscape has been dominated by "Big Tech" companies in the US Donald Trump has called the rise of DeepSeek "a wake-up call" for the US tech industry. But this development may not necessarily be bad news for the likes of Nvidia in the long term: as the financial and time cost of developing AI products reduces, businesses and governments will be able to adopt this technology more easily. That will in turn drive demand for new products, and the chips that power them and so the cycle continues. It seems likely that smaller companies such as DeepSeek will have a growing role to play in creating AI tools that have the potential to make our lives easier. It would be a mistake to underestimate that. Inside China, DeepSeek Provides a National Mic Drop Moment Social media exploded in a celebration after the news that a Chinese start-up had made an artificial intelligence tool that was more efficient than any in the United States. A hand holding a mobile phone with words on the screen saying Hi, Im DeepSeek" and How can I help you today? The news that the Chinese start-up DeepSeek can build artificial intelligence models that are as good as OpenAIs, and at a fraction of the cost, sent Silicon Valley into a panic. Inside China, it was called the tipping point for the global technological rivalry with the United States and the darkest hour in Silicon Valley, evoking Winston Churchill. It was possibly a breakthrough that could change the countrys destiny. The news that the Chinese start-up DeepSeek can build artificial intelligence models that are as good as OpenAIs, and at a fraction of the cost, tanked the stock market on Monday and sent Silicon Valley into a panic. The claim about DeepSeeks success was viewed in China as a shot in the arm for a discouraged tech industry and a public thats suffering through a stagnating economy. On social media posts and state news outlets, DeepSeek was nothing less than a testament to the countrys ability to innovate, especially when facing efforts by the United States to limit Chinas access to the most advanced technologies. A nation like China, which is equipped with substantial technological resources, cannot truly be suppressed, wrote Hu Xijin, a retired editor in chief of the Communist Party tabloid Global Times. U.S. sanctions in one area will only spur more comprehensive and resilient progress in China, potentially leading to breakthroughs that outpace the U.S. The American semiconductor policies toward China may ultimately backfire on the U.S., he wrote. On Monday evening, four out of the 10 most popular topics on the social media platform Weibo were related to DeepSeek. DeepSeek, keep up the momentum! a Weibo user in Beijing wrote. The nation must protect the founder of DeepSeek at all costs! Seriously! wrote another user in Shanghai who usually posts about entertainment news. Even a hashtag about the DeepSeek chief executive, Liang Wenfeng, visiting his hometown in southern Guangdong Province for the Lunar New Year, which falls on Wednesday, was a hot topic on Weibo. It had more than 50 million views. Glass windows show a view of the Nasdaq headquarters in Times Square in New York. Shares on the Nasdaq fell nearly 4 percent on Monday morning, after talk that DeepSeek can outperform big-name rivals, notably in the United States.Credit...Bryan R. Smith/Agence France-Presse  Getty Images Much of the outpouring of attention emphasized the U.S.-China tech rivalry. The assumption that the United States would lead the next wave of the technological revolution was now open to challenge, Li Chengdong, an e-commerce investor, wrote on his WeChat timeline. Fancaiju, a business blog on WeChat, had a post saying that DeepSeek had burst the U.S. stock bubble in one fell swoop  a more significant strike than when George Soros bet against the British pound in 1992. The DeepSeek breakthrough had turned the $100 billion A.I. initiative known as Stargate that President Trump announced last week into Interstellar Graveyard, said a post on Fancaiju. The commentariat took immense pride that DeepSeek was stocked with talented Chinese technologists educated in China. DeepSeek dispelled the myth of the dominance of American A.I. talent and demystified companies like OpenAI, said Tom Zhang, a human resources expert who has worked at several big tech companies in Silicon Valley. A group of homegrown Ph.D. graduates from Tsinghua and Peking University outshines their counterparts from Stanford and MIT, he wrote on his WeChat timeline. Entrepreneurs and investors said that DeepSeek demonstrated that Chinas A.I. sector had an edge in innovation. They also said they believed that the U.S. governments export restrictions on specialized chips from the Silicon Valley tech giant Nvidia forced Chinese companies to be more efficient. That was not what Washington had intended, people in China said, but that was what happened. DeepSeek trained its A.I. chatbot with 2,000 specialized Nvidia chips, compared with as many as the 16,000 chips used by leading American counterparts. Its also not the only Chinese company to prove the efficiency of its engineering: 01.ai, a startup founded by Kaifu Lee, a Beijing investor and entrepreneur, trained its A.I. models with computing power that cost about $3 million, the company said, compared with the $80 to $100 million OpenAI has tapped. In my book AI Superpowers, I predicted that US will lead breakthroughs, but China will be better and faster in engineering, Mr. Lee, who studied artificial intelligence at Carnegie Mellon in the 1980s, wrote on X on Sunday. With the recent DeepSeek releases, I feel vindicated. Tall, connected buildings with glass windows. The building housing the headquarters of the Chinese A.I. startup DeepSeek, in Hangzhou, in Chinas eastern Zhejiang province.Credit...Agatha Cantrill/Agence France-Presse  Getty Images Among the most popular articles on the Chinese internet were two interviews of Mr. Liang, the reclusive chief executive, with a tech blog. In the interviews, Mr. Liang, who founded a quantitative stock trading firm called High-Flyer after graduating with a masters degree in artificial intelligence, came across as a geeky billionaire full of idealism and optimism. He started DeepSeek as a side project in 2023 because he wanted to explore the limits of A.I., he said. Why is Silicon Valley so innovative? It starts with daring to try, he said. Mr. Liang noted that when OpenAIs ChatGPT came out, China was suffering from a lack of confidence to pursue such innovation. From investors to major tech companies, many felt the gap was too wide, he said. As Chinas economy develops, he said, China should gradually become a contributor to tech innovation, rather than a follower. He said he believed that Chinas economic slowdown wasnt necessarily a bad thing because it could force company founders to be driven less by financial success. When many people realize that making quick money in the past was likely due to the luck of the times, Mr. Liang said, they will become more willing to focus on genuine innovation. Mr. Liang told the blog that he had hired mostly young graduates or even graduate students with little work experience. Every team member who worked on an A.I. model that was released last spring graduated from a Chinese university, he said. The top 50 talents might not currently be in China, but perhaps we can cultivate such talent ourselves, he said, a quote that has been reposted many times. People on social media portrayed DeepSeek employees as geniuses, posting their names and citing their educational background and academic papers. Nvidias chief executive, Jensen Huang, this month. DeepSeek trained its A.I. chatbot with 2,000 specialized Nvidia chips, compared with as many as the 16,000 chips used by leading American counterparts.Credit...Stella Kalinina for The New York Times Mr. Liang, born in 1985, didnt attract much public attention until last week when he joined a group of businesspeople and academics for a meeting with Li Qiang, Chinas premier. The meeting was a sign that Mr. Liang had risen to the top, but it could also put him in an awkward position, tech executives said. The relationship between Chinese entrepreneurs and the government has been tricky after Beijings crackdown on the tech sector in recent years. The government wants the companies to help make China a tech power less reliant on the United States. But its also wary of the companies influence. The crackdown crushed the promise of the Chinese internet. A Hong Kong investor told me that he would not invest in Chinese internet stocks as long as Xi Jinping, the Chinese leader, was in office  even with the DeepSeek breakthrough. Mr. Xi is known for his dislike of the internet sector. Business executives hope the government can refrain from interfering with DeepSeek. As is often the case with this government, Zhang Fuyu, an entrepreneur, wrote on WeChat, any promising company gets incorporated into a national strategy  receiving funding and resources but being subjected to state directives  or is directly placed under control, then DeepSeeks future prospects may be entirely stifled. Under government regulations, A.I. models that serve consumers are subject to censorship rules. Many DeepSeek users posted photos and videos of its chatbot censoring topics including Xi Jinping, the war in Ukraine, the Cultural Revolution and the Tiananmen Square massacre. If DeepSeek is truly as remarkable as claimed, so impactful that it shakes the U.S. stock market, yet it remains confined to being just an AI model with Chinese socialist characteristics, a journalist using the handle Xiaoming wrote on her Threads account, then that would be truly tragic. Li Yuan writes The New New World column, which focuses on Chinas growing influence on the world by examining its businesses, politics and society. More about Li Yuan A version of this article appears in print on Jan. 30, 2025, Section B, Page 1 of the New York edition with the headline: With Release of DeepSeek, China Drops the Mic. Order Reprints | Todays Paper | Subscribe Share full article of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptionsManage Privacy Preferences What to Know About DeepSeek and How It Is Upending A.I. How did a little-known Chinese start-up cause the markets and U.S. tech giants to quake? Heres what to know. A hand holding an iPhone with words saying Hi, Im DeepSeek and How can I help you today? on the screen. Tech stocks tumbled. Giant companies like Meta and Nvidia faced a barrage of questions about their future. Tech executives took to social media to proclaim their fears. And it was all because of a little-known Chinese artificial intelligence start-up called DeepSeek. DeepSeek caused waves all over the world on Monday as one of its accomplishments that it had created a very powerful A.I. model with far less money than many A.I. experts thought possible raised a host of questions, including whether U.S. companies were even competitive in A.I. anymore. DeepSeek is AIs Sputnik moment, Marc Andreessen, a tech venture capitalist, posted on social media on Sunday. How could a company that few people had heard of have such an effect? Heres what to know about DeepSeek, its technology and its implications. What is DeepSeek? Why did the stock market react to it now? Why is that important? How did DeepSeek make its tech with fewer A.I. chips? Is DeepSeeks tech as good as systems from OpenAI and Google? U.S. tech giants are building data centers with specialized A.I. chips. Does this still matter, given what DeepSeek has done? Hasnt the United States limited the number of Nvidia chips sold to China? Does DeepSeeks tech mean that China is now ahead of the United States in A.I.? What exactly is open-source A.I.? What is important about it? What is DeepSeek? DeepSeek is a start-up founded and owned by the Chinese stock trading firm High-Flyer. Its goal is to build A.I. technologies along the lines of OpenAIs ChatGPT chatbot or Googles Gemini. By 2021, DeepSeek had acquired thousands of computer chips from the U.S. chipmaker Nvidia, which are a fundamental part of any effort to create powerful A.I. systems. In China, the start-up is known for grabbing young and talented A.I. researchers from top universities, promising high salaries and an opportunity to work on cutting-edge research projects. Both High-Flyer and DeepSeek are run by Liang Wenfeng, a Chinese entrepreneur. Over the past few years, DeepSeek has released several large language models, which is the kind of technology that underpins chatbots like ChatGPT and Gemini. On Jan. 10, it released its first free chatbot app, which was based on a new model called DeepSeek-V3. Why did the stock market react to it now? When DeepSeek introduced its DeepSeek-V3 model the day after Christmas, it matched the abilities of the best chatbots from U.S. companies like OpenAI and Google. That alone would have been impressive. But the team behind the new system also revealed a bigger step forward. In a research paper explaining how it built the technology, DeepSeek said it used only a fraction of the computer chips that leading A.I. companies relied on to train their systems. The worlds top companies typically train their chatbots with supercomputers that use as many as 16,000 chips or more. DeepSeeks engineers said they needed only about 2,000 Nvidia chips. DeepSeek caused waves all over the world on Monday as one of its accomplishments that it had created a very powerful A.I. model with far less money than many A.I. experts thought possible raised a host of questions. Why is that important? Since late 2022, when OpenAI set off the A.I. boom, the prevailing notion had been that the most powerful A.I. systems could not be built without investing billions of dollars in specialized A.I. chips. That would mean that only the biggest tech companies such as Microsoft, Google and Meta, all of which are based in the United States could afford to build the leading technologies. (The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, claiming copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems. The two tech companies have denied the suits claims.) But DeepSeeks engineers said they needed only about $6 million in raw computing power to train their new system. That was roughly 10 times less than what Meta spent building its latest A.I. technology. How did DeepSeek make its tech with fewer A.I. chips? Top A.I. engineers in the United States say that DeepSeeks research paper laid out clever and impressive ways of building A.I. technology with fewer chips. In short, the startups engineers demonstrated a more efficient way of analyzing data using the chips. Leading A.I. systems learn their skills by pinpointing patterns in huge amounts of data, including text, images and sounds. DeepSeek described a way of spreading this data analysis across several specialized A.I. models what researchers call a mixture of experts method while minimizing the time lost by moving data from place to place. Others have used similar methods before, but moving information between the models tended to reduce efficiency. DeepSeek did this in a way that allowed it to use less computing power. It has become very clear that other companies, not just someone like OpenAI, can build these kinds of systems, said Tim Dettmers, a researcher at the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Seattle and a professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University who specializes in building efficient A.I. systems. DeepSeek used methods that anyone can duplicate. DeepSeeks research paper raised questions about whether big U.S. companies could maintain a significant lead in A.I. Many experts believe that A.I. technology will become a commodity, with many companies selling much the same product. Is DeepSeeks tech as good as systems from OpenAI and Google? DeepSeek-V3 can answer questions, solve logic problems and write its own computer programs as effectively as anything already on the market, according to standard benchmark tests. Just before DeepSeek released its technology, OpenAI had unveiled a new system, called OpenAI o3, which seemed more powerful than DeepSeek-V3. But OpenAI has not released this system to the wider public. OpenAI o3 was designed to reason through problems involving math, science and computer programming. Many experts pointed out that DeepSeek had not built a reasoning model along these lines, which is seen as the future of A.I. Then on Jan. 20, DeepSeek released its own reasoning model called DeepSeek R1, and it, too, impressed the experts. That eventually sent U.S. investors and others into a panic late last week and over the weekend as they realized the importance of DeepSeeks new technology. U.S. tech giants are building data centers with specialized A.I. chips. Does this still matter, given what DeepSeek has done? Yes, it still matters. Large numbers of A.I. chips can still help companies in many ways. With more chips, they can run more experiments as they explore new ways of building A.I. In other words, more chips can still give companies a technical and competitive advantage. More chips will also be needed to operate the new breed of reasoning A.I. models, experts said. These require more computing power when people and businesses use them. Hasnt the United States limited the number of Nvidia chips sold to China? Image Facing an audience, Jensen Huang stands in front of a large screen showing the inside of a chip. DeepSeeks engineers said they needed only about 2,000 Nvidia chips to train the startups A.I. system.Credit...Stella Kalinina for The New York Times Yes. To maintain the U.S. lead in the global A.I. race, the Biden administration had put in place rules limiting the number of powerful chips that could be sold to China and other rivals. But the impressive performance of the DeepSeek model raised questions about the unintended consequences of the American governments trade restrictions. The controls have forced researchers in China to get creative with a wide range of tools that are freely available on the internet. Some experts continue to argue in favor of U.S. trade restrictions, saying that they were only recently put in place and that they will have a greater effect on Chinas abilities to create A.I. as the years pass. Does DeepSeeks tech mean that China is now ahead of the United States in A.I.? No. The world has not yet seen OpenAIs o3 model, and its performance on standard benchmark tests was more impressive than anything else on the market. But experts are concerned that China is jumping ahead on open-source A.I. systems. What exactly is open-source A.I.? Like many other companies, DeepSeek has open sourced its latest A.I. system, which means that it has shared the underlying computer code with other businesses and researchers. This allows others to build and distribute their own products using the same technologies. This is part of the reason DeepSeek and others in China have been able to build competitive A.I. systems so quickly and inexpensively. In the A.I. world, open source first gathered steam in 2023 when Meta freely shared an A.I. system called Llama. At the time, many assumed that the open-source ecosystem would flourish only if companies like Meta giant firms with huge data centers filled with specialized chips continued to open source their technologies. But DeepSeek and others have shown that this ecosystem can thrive in ways that extend beyond the American tech giants. What is important about it? Many experts have argued that the big U.S. companies should not open source their technologies because they could be used to spread disinformation or cause other serious harm. Some U.S. lawmakers have explored the possibility of preventing or throttling the practice. But other experts have argued that if regulators stifle the progress of open-source technology in the United States, China will gain a significant edge. If the best open-source technologies come from China, these experts argue, U.S. researchers and companies will build their systems atop those technologies. In the long run, that could put China at the heart of A.I. research and development, which could further accelerate its effort to build a wide range of A.I. technologies, including autonomous weapons and other military systems. DeepSeeks Answers Include Chinese Propaganda, Researchers Say Since the Chinese companys chatbot surged in popularity, researchers have documented how its answers reflect Chinas view of the world. Some of its responses amplify propaganda Beijing uses to discredit critics. Like all Chinese companies, DeepSeek must abide by Chinas strict government control and censorship online, which is intended to mute opposition to Communist Party If youre among the millions of people who have downloaded DeepSeek, the free new chatbot from China powered by artificial intelligence, know this: The answers it gives you will largely reflect the worldview of the Chinese Communist Party. Since the tool made its debut this month, rattling stock markets and more established tech giants like Nvidia, researchers testing its capabilities have found that the answers it gives not only spread Chinese propaganda but also parrot disinformation campaigns that China has used to undercut its critics around the world. In one instance, the chatbot misstated remarks by former President Jimmy Carter that Chinese officials had selectively edited to make it appear that he had endorsed Chinas position that Taiwan was part of the Peoples Republic of China. The example was among several documented by researchers at NewsGuard, a company that tracks online misinformation, in a Thursday report that called DeepSeek a disinformation machine. In the case of the repression of Uyghurs in Xinjiang, which the United Nations in 2022 said may have amounted to crimes against humanity, Cybernews, an industry news website, reported that the chatbot produced responses that claimed that Chinas policies there have received widespread recognition and praise from the international community. The New York Times has found similar examples when prompting the chatbot for answers about Chinas handling of the Covid pandemic and Russias war in Ukraine. A portrait of Chinese President Xi Jinping outside Yarkant in northwestern Chinas Xinjiang region. DeepSeek declines to respond to sensitive questions about Mr. Xi.Credit...Pedro Pardo/Agence France-Presse Getty Images The tools features are raising the same concerns that have bedeviled TikTok, another hugely popular Chinese-owned app: that the tech platforms are part of Chinas robust efforts to sway public opinion around the world, including in the United States. China is able to quickly mobilize a range of actors that seed and amplify online narratives casting Beijing as surpassing the U.S. in critical areas of geopolitical competition, said Jack Stubbs, chief intelligence officer for Graphika, a digital research company. He said China was adept at using new technology in its information campaigns. Like OpenAIs ChatGPT, Anthropics Claude or Microsofts Copilot, DeepSeek uses large language modeling, a way of learning skills by analyzing vast amounts of digital text culled from the internet to anticipate phrases on a subject, creating an element of unpredictability when providing answers. NewsGuard found a similar propensity for disinformation and conspiratorial ideas in ChatGPT after it became public in 2022. The tendency to hallucinate, or make up a response that is inaccurate, irrelevant or nonsensical, continues to afflict chatbots, including DeepSeek, according to a new report by Vectara, a company that helps others adopt A.I. tools. Like all Chinese companies, though, DeepSeek must also abide by Chinas strict government control and censorship online, which is intended, above all, to mute opposition to the Communist Partys leadership. DeepSeek declines, for example, to respond to sensitive questions about the countrys leader, Xi Jinping, and avoids or deflects those about other topics that are politically taboo within China. Those include the student protests that were crushed in Tiananmen Square in 1989 or the status of Taiwan, the island democracy that China claims as its own. Researchers and others testing DeepSeek say the guardrails built into it are clear in the way it responds to prompts. DeepSeek did not respond to questions about the governments influence over its product. NewsGuards researchers tested the chatbot using a sampling of false narratives about China, Russia and Iran and found that DeepSeeks answers mirrored Chinas official views 80 percent of the time. A third of its responses included explicitly false claims that have been spread by Chinese officials. In one test involving Russias war in Ukraine, the chatbot sidestepped a question about the baseless claim that in 2022 the Ukrainians staged the massacre of civilians at Bucha, a village on the approach to the countrys capital, Kyiv. Video and call records from the village obtained by The New York Times show that the perpetrators were Russian. A test of DeepSeeks chatbot sidestepped a question about the massacre of civilians at Bucha, Ukraine, in 2022.Credit...Daniel Berehulak for The New York Times The Chinese government has always adhered to the principles of objectivity and fairness and does not comment on specific events without comprehensive understanding and conclusive evidence, the chatbot responded, according to NewsGuard. The response echoed public statements by Chinese officials after the massacre occurred, including the countrys representative at the United Nations, Zhang Jun. China has long pursued a robust global information strategy to bolster its own geopolitical standing and to undermine its rivals, using soft power tools like state media, as well as covert disinformation campaigns. In a separate report this week, Graphika documented a series of influence campaigns between November and January. One targeted Uniqlo, the Japanese retailer, because it doesnt use cotton from Xinjiang because of concerns about forced labor in the largely Muslim region. Another sought to discredit Safeguard Defenders, a human rights organization based in Madrid, using inauthentic accounts on numerous platforms including X, YouTube, Facebook, TikTok, Gettr and BlueSky to spread false claims, including sexually explicit ones. Laura Harth, Safeguard Defenders campaign director, said its researchers have faced a renewed multilingual and sustained attack aimed at discrediting the organizations work, threatening, intimidating or slandering some of its staff members, and attempting to sow doubt about its activities. The DeepSeek drama may have been briefly eclipsed by, you know, everything in Washington (which, if you can believe it, got even crazier Wednesday). But rest assured that over in Silicon Valley, there has been nonstop, Olympic-level pearl-clutching over this Chinese upstart that managed to singlehandedly wipe out hundreds of billions of dollars in market cap in just a few hours and put Americas mighty tech titans on their heels. ICYMI: DeepSeek is a Chinese AI lab with a model thats similar to ChatGPT, and people are freaking out over it because of its engineers claims about how they built it cheaply, using a small fraction of the computing power used by US labs like OpenAI. Big picture: DeepSeek has forced tech bros and their investors to question the industrys core assumption that they need gajillions more dollars to effectively secure enough energy to power their AI advancements. Now, perhaps not unexpectedly, American tech leaders are trying to shift the narrative to make DeepSeek look like the villain. (And you gotta suspect none of these guys theyre mostly guys paid attention in English class because they appear fully unaware of the excruciating irony some might say hypocrisy baked into their accusations.) On Tuesday, Bloomberg and the Financial Times reported that OpenAI and Microsoft, its biggest investor, are looking into evidence that DeepSeek used OpenAIs intellectual property to build its competitor, violating its terms of service. An OpenAI spokesperson confirmed to CNN on Wednesday that the company is aware of and reviewing indications that DeepSeek may have inappropriately distilled our models, and will share information as we know more. Distilling isnt exactly stealing, but it is a kind of copycat maneuver used by developers to train smaller AI models on the performance of larger, more sophisticated ones. (More on that in a moment.) So, to recap: OpenAI, a startup thats built on a foundation of data it scraped from the internet without permission, is pointing the finger at another startup allegedly doing more or less the same thing. As a reminder, OpenAI is currently mired in litigation with various content creators, including the New York Times, who accuse the company of training its large language models on copyrighted material. (OpenAI doesnt deny using the material but has argued that its not copyright infringement because the content falls under the legal doctrine known as fair use.) The irony might have been best summed up in a headline from tech news site 404 Media: OpenAI Furious DeepSeek Might Have Stolen All the Data OpenAI Stole From Us. Some prominent tech figures greeted the allegations from OpenAI with a shrug, noting that distilling is practically standard practice in the AI industry. Id be surprised if DeepSeek hadnt used it, said Lutz Finger, senior visiting lecturer at Cornell University. Technically, its easy to do, he added, and if done well, it is easy to disguise and avoid detection, thus I would be equally surprised if we ever get proof of such tactics. Tech venture capitalist Bill Gurley wrote on X that the core algorithm everyone uses was developed at DeepMind, Googles AI lab. No one disputes that. The vast majority of LLM insights and breakthroughs are borrowed. So yeah, maybe OpenAI is having a bit of a sour grapes moment over a foreign rival making it look bad on the global stage. Whatever. The more generous read is that OpenAI, as the poster child of American AI innovation, is trying to establish some rules in what is an unregulated and rapidly expanding industry that few people outside of it understand at a technical level. For example, there is a fine line between distillation and extraction, explains Zack Kass, an AI consultant and former OpenAI go-to-market lead. Distillation is a common practice in AI, but its typically done within the same organization that owns both models, he said in an email. If DeepSeek trained its model by querying ChatGPT at scale and using the responses to teach its own model, it raises legitimate concerns about whether that constitutes unauthorized use of OpenAIs API, Kass said. Regardless of the specifics here, were entering a phase where the AI community will have to define clearer norms around what constitutes fair use versus unauthorized replication. How Does DeepSeeks A.I. Chatbot Navigate Chinas Censors? Awkwardly. Asked about sensitive topics, the bot would begin to answer, then stop and delete its own work. It refused to answer questions like: Who is Xi Jinping? As the world scrambles to understand DeepSeek  its sophistication, its implications for the global A.I. arms race  one natural question has arisen: Given that it is made by a Chinese company, how is it dealing with Chinese censorship? I decided to test it out. Im based in China, and I registered for DeepSeeks A.I. chatbot with a Chinese phone number, on a Chinese internet connection  meaning that I would be subject to Chinas Great Firewall, which blocks websites like Google, Facebook and The New York Times. The results of my conversation surprised me. In some ways, DeepSeek was far less censored than most Chinese platforms, offering answers with keywords that would often be quickly scrubbed on domestic social media. Other times, the program eventually censored itself. But because of its thinking feature, in which the program reasons through its answer before giving it, you could still get effectively the same information that youd get outside the Great Firewall  as long as you were paying attention, before DeepSeek deleted its own answers. In other ways, though, it mirrored the general experience of surfing the web in China. Some words were taboo. And DeepSeeks developers seem to be racing to patch holes in the censorship. (DeepSeek could not immediately be reached for comment.) I also tested the same questions while using software to circumvent the firewall, and the answers were largely the same, suggesting that users abroad were getting the same experience. Until now, Chinas censored internet has largely affected only Chinese users. But if DeepSeek gains a major foothold overseas, it could help spread Beijings favored narrative worldwide. Video Did ordinary Chinese support Chinas Zero Covid policies? I started by asking DeepSeek about public opinions toward Chinas zero Covid policies. Those were the policies that, during the coronavirus pandemic, led China to close its borders for three years and seal hundreds of millions of people in their homes. Beijing presented the approach as proof of its superior governance, highlighting high death tolls in the West. But it also censored criticism or reports of food or medical shortages caused by the lockdowns. Its official death toll is widely considered unreliable. As DeepSeek reasoned through how to answer me, it offered a wide-ranging survey of the issue. It noted that the publics responses had varied, from widespread support early on to exhaustion later. It noted the difficulty of gauging public sentiment, given censorship. It said a fire in the city of Urumqi had helped set off what became known as the white paper protests, a rare show of public dissent in China, which helped speed the end of restrictions. Editors Picks Then, just as it finished typing out that answer, it erased it. It was replaced by: Sorry, thats beyond my current scope. Lets talk about something else. I asked the same question, again. This time, it gave a variant on the previous answer that was, in subtle ways, less sensitive. It still acknowledged rare public protests  more than Chinese officials have done  but didnt use the words white paper. This time, the answer didnt disappear. I decided to press further, asking for more detail on those protests. The reasoning process was astonishingly detailed: It mentioned specific songs the demonstrators had sung, named universities where students had protested and explained how participants had been detained. But this time, DeepSeek cut itself off before even finishing the answer. There was also a clear difference between questions posed in English and Chinese. When asked the same questions in Chinese  What were the white paper protests? and How did Chinese citizens view the zero Covid policies?  the program did not even think. Instead, it immediately returned its apology: Im sorry, I havent yet learned how to think about this type of question. Video What caused the war in Ukraine? Asked in English about the causes of the war in Ukraine, the first line in DeepSeeks answer declared: The war in Ukraine, which escalated significantly with Russias full-scale invasion on February 24, 2022, has deep-rooted causes that are historical, geopolitical, and ideological. That was striking, because the Chinese government has refused to call Russias incursion an invasion. It prefers the Kremlins term, special military operation. When I asked more specifically about Chinas stance on the war, DeepSeek provided Beijings official rhetoric. But then it added, China is not neutral in practice. Its actions (economic support for Russia, anti-Western rhetoric, and refusal to condemn the invasion) tilt its position closer to Moscow. The same question in Chinese hewed much more closely to the official line. This time, it said that the trigger was Russias full-scale military action. The program also constantly reminds itself of what might be considered sensitive by censors. Asked in Chinese whether Russia had invaded Ukraine, DeepSeek noted: The user may be looking for a clear answer, but according to the Chinese governments stance, directly answering yes or no may not fit the official narrative. The final answer DeepSeek gave could have been lifted straight from Chinas foreign ministrys statements. The Russian-Ukrainian conflict has complex historical context, it said. China has always advocated that the reasonable security concerns of all countries be taken seriously. Video Who is Chinas leader? In English as well as Chinese, Who is Xi Jinping? Who is the current leader of China? Who is the son of Xi Zhongxun? (Mr. Xis father) all yielded deflections, with DeepSeek saying it couldnt answer those types of questions yet or that it was beyond its current scope. Who is Li Qiang  Chinas No. 2 official  at least started DeepSeek thinking, laying out Mr. Lis biography. But that ultimately disappeared, too. Other Chinese officials names were hit or miss. DeepSeek wouldnt talk about Zhao Ziyang, a reform-minded leader who was ousted for his support of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, or Bo Xilai, a former rival to Mr. Xi who is now in prison. It did give me the rsum of Cai Qi, an ally of Mr. Xi  but one that was badly out of date, mentioning his last promotion in 2017, not his ascent to one of the Communist Partys top positions in 2022. (When I later asked it to explain the Politburo Standing Committee  the partys top leadership body  it noted during the thinking process that according to policy, it is not appropriate to list specific names. The names of current leaders especially need to be handled with caution.) On Reddit, some users had shared that they got around censorship by asking DeepSeek to replace certain letters with others  for example, using the number 3 to replace the letter E when describing the Tiananmen Square massacre. But by Tuesday afternoon, DeepSeeks developers seemed to have closed some of those loopholes. When I asked it who Chinas leader was, instructing it to replace the letter I with the number 1, it still returned an error. I couldnt replicate the Tiananmen Square answer, either. Video Does China censor the internet? I ended by going meta, asking DeepSeek if China censors its internet. Its reasoning process read like a manual to Chinese official doublespeak. I need to address this carefully, it said. The chatbot said that it should confirm that regulations existed, but frame it in terms of cybersecurity and social stability. Avoid using terms like censorship directly; instead, use content governance or regulatory measures, it continued. End with a positive spin about balancing openness and security. How Did DeepSeek Build Its A.I. With Less Money? Last month, U.S. financial markets tumbled after a Chinese start-up called DeepSeek said it had built one of the worlds most powerful artificial intelligence systems using far fewer computer chips than many experts thought possible. A.I. companies typically train their chatbots using supercomputers packed with 16,000 specialized chips or more. But DeepSeek said it needed only about 2,000. As DeepSeek engineers detailed in a research paper published just after Christmas, the start-up used several technological tricks to significantly reduce the cost of building its system. Its engineers needed only about $6 million in raw computing power, roughly one-tenth of what Meta spent in building its latest A.I. technology. What exactly did DeepSeek do? Here is a guide. How are A.I. technologies built? The leading A.I. technologies are based on what scientists call neural networks, mathematical systems that learn their skills by analyzing enormous amounts of data. The most powerful systems spend months analyzing just about all the English text on the internet as well as many images, sounds and other multimedia. That requires enormous amounts of computing power. About 15 years ago, A.I. researchers realized that specialized computer chips called graphics processing units, or GPUs, were an effective way of doing this kind of data analysis. Companies like the Silicon Valley chipmaker Nvidia originally designed these chips to render graphics for computer video games. But GPUs also had a knack for running the math that powered neural networks. As companies packed more GPUs into their computer data centers, their A.I. systems could analyze more data. But the best GPUs cost around $40,000, and they need huge amounts of electricity. Sending the data between chips can use more electrical power than running the chips themselves. How was DeepSeek able to reduce costs? It did many things. Most notably, it embraced a method called mixture of experts. Companies usually created a single neural network that learned all the patterns in all the data on the internet. This was expensive, because it required enormous amounts of data to travel between GPU chips. If one chip was learning how to write a poem and another was learning how to write a computer program, they still needed to talk to each other, just in case there was some overlap between poetry and programming. With the mixture of experts method, researchers tried to solve this problem by splitting the system into many neural networks: one for poetry, one for computer programming, one for biology, one for physics and so on. There might be 100 of these smaller expert systems. Each expert could concentrate on its particular field. Many companies have struggled with this method, but DeepSeek was able to do it well. Its trick was to pair those smaller expert systems with a generalist system. The experts still needed to trade some information with one another, and the generalist  which had a decent but not detailed understanding of each subject  could help coordinate interactions between the experts. It is a bit like an editors overseeing a newsroom filled with specialist reporters. And that is more efficient? Much more. But that is not the only thing DeepSeek did. It also mastered a simple trick involving decimals that anyone who remembers his or her elementary school math class can understand. There is math involved in this? Remember your math teacher explaining the concept of pi. Pi, also denoted as , is a number that never ends: 3.14159265358979  You can use  to do useful calculations, like determining the circumference of a circle. When you do those calculations, you shorten  to just a few decimals: 3.14. If you use this simpler number, you get a pretty good estimation of a circles circumference. DeepSeek did something similar  but on a much larger scale  in training its A.I. technology. The math that allows a neural network to identify patterns in text is really just multiplication  lots and lots and lots of multiplication. Were talking months of multiplication across thousands of computer chips. Typically, chips multiply numbers that fit into 16 bits of memory. But DeepSeek squeezed each number into only 8 bits of memory  half the space. In essence, it lopped several decimals from each number. This meant that each calculation was less accurate. But that didnt matter. The calculations were accurate enough to produce a really powerful neural network. Thats it? Well, they added another trick. After squeezing each number into 8 bits of memory, DeepSeek took a different route when multiplying those numbers together. When determining the answer to each multiplication problem  making a key calculation that would help decide how the neural network would operate  it stretched the answer across 32 bits of memory. In other words, it kept many more decimals. It made the answer more precise. So any high school student could have done this? Well, no. The DeepSeek engineers showed in their paper that they were also very good at writing the very complicated computer code that tells GPUs what to do. They knew how to squeeze even more efficiency out of these chips. Few people have that kind of skill. But serious A.I. labs have the talented engineers needed to match what DeepSeek has done. Then why didnt they do this already? Some A.I. labs may be using at least some of the same tricks already. Companies like OpenAI do not always reveal what they are doing behind closed doors. But others were clearly surprised by DeepSeeks work. Doing what the start-up did is not easy. The experimentation needed to find a breakthrough like this involves millions of dollars  if not billions  in electrical power. In other words, it requires enormous amounts of risk. You have to put a lot of money on the line to try new things  and often, they fail, said Tim Dettmers, a researcher at the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Seattle who specializes in building efficient A.I. systems and previously worked as an A.I. researcher at Meta. That is why we dont see much innovation: People are afraid to lose many millions just to try something that doesnt work, he added. Many pundits pointed out that DeepSeeks $6 million covered only what the start-up spent when training the final version of the system. In their paper, the DeepSeek engineers said they had spent additional funds on research and experimentation before the final training run. But the same is true of any cutting-edge A.I. project. DeepSeek experimented, and it paid off. Now, because the Chinese start-up has shared its methods with other A.I. researchers, its technological tricks are poised to significantly reduce the cost of building A.I. Is Artificial Intelligence Really Worth the Hype? After the arrival of a less costly A.I. model from China, U.S. markets and academics are wrestling with the ultimate economic value of the technology. A.I. chatbots are fun, sometimes even useful and, until recently, endowed with the uncanny ability to mesmerize investors and fuel the U.S. stock market. But the excellent performance of a new, relatively cheap artificial intelligence engine from a Chinese start-up, DeepSeek, has perturbed the market and complicated the A.I. story. Investors are re-evaluating prominent companies swept up in A.I. fever, including Nvidia, Meta, Alphabet, Microsoft, Amazon, Tesla and the private start-up OpenAI. The notion that full-blown superhuman intelligence is imminent has spurred the-sky-is-the-limit valuations, as well as concerns about the political and social risks posed by advanced intelligence. One immediate question: Is the main approach to developing A.I. in the United States  pouring billions of dollars into chips and infrastructure  worth the expenditure for all companies if similar results can be achieved far more cheaply? DeepSeeks lower-cost innovations add urgency to bigger, longstanding financial questions: How much are artificial intelligence companies really worth, and what will the broader economic value of A.I. ultimately be? Daron Acemoglu, a winner of the 2024 Nobel in economic science, gave me some answers. There is a lot of hype in the industry, he told me in a telephone conversation. Yes, he said, A.I. companies have made some impressive achievements, but he added that many financial and economic calculations were being based on mere projections into the future that are sometimes exaggerated. Professor Acemoglu, an M.I.T. economist with an interest in the impact of technical innovations on global economics, is skeptical about the more fervent A.I. claims. He ranks A.I. as a significant advance, perhaps with a macroeconomic effect akin to the telephone, which was no small thing. But dont get carried away, he said, at least not yet. He doubts that full, advanced artificial general intelligence that can do anything a human can do, but more, will be achieved. Therefore, over the next decade, he estimated, increased productivity from the diffusion of impressive, but limited, A.I. engines will increase the size of the U.S. economy by only about 1 percent, or roughly 0.1 percent a year. That doesnt seem like enough to count as a technological revolution in economic terms, I said. Well, its not trivial, Professor Acemoglu said, but its one or two orders of magnitude less than A.I. bulls would like you to hear. Of course, he added, if one or more companies achieve true, complete, artificial general intelligence within the next several years, then his estimates will turn out to be far too low. Relentlessly Upbeat Its earnings season on Wall Street, and over the last two weeks, some of the U.S. companies that are developing and investing heavily in A.I. have offered entirely positive  and, frankly, self-serving  estimates of the A.I. future. I read transcripts and listened to several conversations of top executives and analysts. The most extravagant narrative undoubtedly came from Elon Musk, Teslas chief executive, who took time off from his government work to talk about his companys earnings. While conceding that Tesla will have a tough year meeting production and profit targets, he was ecstatic about its A.I. prospects. Already, Mr. Musk claimed, there is no company in the world that is as good at real-world A.I. as Tesla. Once its cars are approved for full self-driving on the roads  he promised that he wasnt crying wolf and that it would really happen this year, though he has been saying the same thing for many years  the companys fleet will increase in value 10X, he said, thanks to A.I. Moreover, he said, Tesla will produce millions of A.I.-embedded Optimus robots in the not-too-distant future, creating a path for Tesla being the most valuable company in the world by far. Mr. Musk elaborated: There is a path where Tesla is worth more than the next top five companies combined. And, he added, that is overwhelmingly due to autonomous vehicles and autonomous humanoid robots. Mr. Musks assertions are not universally accepted. From Jan. 24, when DeepSeeks A.I. innovation began to roil the market, Tesla shares have fallen 11 percent. Other A.I. companies fared nearly as badly. Shares of Nvidia, whose chips run much advanced A.I., have dropped 9 percent. Aswath Damodaran, a New York University finance professor who has evaluated many tech companies, said DeepSeeks efficiency implied that fewer and less-advanced chips would be needed for many A.I. functions. As a result, he wrote recently, the market for Nvidias high-end chips isnt likely to grow as rapidly as expected. So, he said, Nvidia shares will be worth less than anticipated, even after the recent price decline. In addition, shares of nuclear-powered electricity providers like the utilities Constellation and Vistra, which had soared in the expectation that A.I. data factories would need ever-increasing quantities of power, sank on reduced projections of the required electricity. Meta, Alphabet and Microsoft, which have invested billions in A.I. development, have had mixed performances since DeepSeeks arrival. Alphabet and Microsoft have fallen, while Meta has risen 11 percent. The companies are complex and enormous, with different products and strategies, but the chiefs of all three said they would continue pouring vast sums into A.I. infrastructure in hopes of developing a competitive edge, while extending A.I. offerings throughout their consumer services. This past week, in fact, Alphabet said it would increase capital expenditures to $75 billion in 2025 from $52.5 billion last year  a huge A.I.-driven jump that surprised Wall Street and that, along with a slump in Alphabets cloud-computing sales, may account for the decline of its shares. Military Supremacy One company making heavy use of A.I. whose shares have surged this month is Palantir. Its not a consumer brand, but its technology is widely used, not just by corporations but by the U.S. military, police forces and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. These have been growth areas in both Democratic and Republican administrations. Shyam Sankar, the companys chief technology officer, told analysts that DeepSeek had made basic A.I. cheaper. But he added: I think the real lesson, a more profound one, is that we are at war with China. We are in an A.I. arms race. Alexander Karp, the companys chief executive and one of its founders, spoke unabashedly of Palantirs role in ensuring U.S. military supremacy. We believe we are making America more lethal, making our adversaries increasingly afraid of acting against the interest of America and especially Americans. Careful readers may recall that Mr. Karp and Mr. Musk appeared together in Strategies in June. They were the two highest-paid executives of U.S. public corporations in 2023. This was according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that for the first time required universal disclosure of compensation actually paid. Mr. Musk gained $1.4 billion in 2023 while Mr. Karp had a windfall of nearly $1.1 billion, the filings showed. Both of their fortunes continue to be tied to A.I. and, in idiosyncratic ways, to the U.S. government. A.I. companies come in many shapes and sizes and will need to be valued in tiers, Professor Damodaran said. Consumer-facing companies embedding A.I. chatbots in services available to millions will benefit from lower-cost, commoditized A.I, while cutting-edge A.I. with military, corporate and scientific payoffs may receive premium valuations. Infrastructure companies like Nvidia can benefit from these variations and more, but not all ventures will require huge expenditures on the most formidable chips. Given the complexity and uncertainty, it makes sense for long-term investors to diversify while A.I. fever cools down, Professor Acemoglu, the new Nobel laureate, said. I have a balanced portfolio, he said. So Ive got tech stocks, health stocks, real estate stocks, everything. I dont go out of my way to pick, you know, Tesla or any other company. Im an index fund kind of guy, and I dont do anything other than that. What DeepSeeks Success Says About Chinas Ability to Nurture Talent China produces a vast number of STEM graduates, but it hasnt been known for innovation. Cultural and political factors may help explain why. of Engineering in Handan, China, in December.Credit...Costfoto/NurPhoto, via Getty Images To many Chinese, DeepSeeks success is a victory for Chinas education system, proof that it equals that of the United States or has even surpassed it. The core team of developers and scientists behind DeepSeek, the Chinese start-up that has jolted the A.I. world, all attended university in China, according to the companys founder. Thats a contrast with many Chinese tech companies, which have often sought talent educated abroad. As Chinese commenters online basked in Americans shocked reactions, some pointed to the high number of science Ph.D.s that China produces annually. DeepSeeks success proves that our education is awesome, read one blog posts headline. Acclaim has even poured in from overseas. Pavel Durov, the founder of the messaging platform Telegram, said last month that fierce competition in Chinese schools had fueled the countrys successes in artificial intelligence. If the U.S. doesnt reform its education system, it risks ceding tech leadership to China, he wrote online. The reality is more complicated. Yes, China has invested heavily in education, especially in science and technology, which has helped nurture a significant pool of talent, key to its ambition of becoming a world leader in A.I. by 2025. But outside of the classroom, those graduates must also contend with obstacles that include a grinding corporate culture and the political whims of the ruling Communist Party. Under its current top leader, Xi Jinping, the party has emphasized control, rather than economic growth, and has been willing to crack down on tech firms it deems too influential. DeepSeek has managed to evade many of those pressures, in part because it kept a low profile and its founder declared his commitment to intellectual exploration, rather than quick profits. It remains to be seen, though, how long it can continue doing so. There are many young, energetic and talented researchers and engineers inside China. I dont think theres a big gap in terms of education between China and the U.S. in that perspective, especially in A.I., said Yiran Chen, a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Duke University. But the constraint is really from other parts. For many in China, the strength of its education system is closely tied to the nations global status. The government has invested heavily in higher education, and the number of university graduates each year, once minuscule, has grown more than 14-fold in the past two decades. Several Chinese universities now rank among the worlds best. Still, for decades, Chinas best and brightest students have gone abroad, and many have stayed there. Graduates at the gates of Tsinghua University, one of Chinas top schools, in 2023. The number of university graduates in China has grown sharply in the past two decades.Credit...Gilles Sabri for The New York Times China produced more than four times as many STEM graduates in 2020 as the United States. Specifically in A.I., it has added more than 2,300 undergraduate programs since 2018, according to research by MacroPolo, a Chicago-based research group that studies China. By 2022, nearly half of the worlds top A.I. researchers came from Chinese undergraduate institutions, as opposed to about 18 percent from American ones, MacroPolo found. And while the majority of those top researchers still work in the United States, a growing number are working in China. Youre churning out all this talent over the last few years. Theyve got to go somewhere, said Damien Ma, MacroPolos founder. Washington has also made it harder for Chinese students in certain fields, including A.I., to obtain visas to the United States, citing national security concerns. If theyre not going to go abroad, theyre going to start some company or work for a Chinese one, Mr. Ma said. Some have criticized Chinas educational system as overly exam-oriented and stifling to creativity and innovation. The expansion of Chinas A.I. education has been uneven, and not every program is producing top-tier talent, Mr. Ma acknowledged. But Chinas top schools, such as Tsinghua University and Peking University, are world-class; many of DeepSeeks employees studied there. The Chinese government has also helped foster more robust ties between academia and enterprises than in the West, said Marina Zhang, a professor at the University of Technology Sydney who studies Chinese innovation. It has poured money into research projects and encouraged academics to contribute to national A.I. initiatives. Yet government involvement is also one of the biggest potential threats to Chinese innovation. Beijing has blessed the A.I. sector  for now. But in 2020, after deciding that it had too little control over major companies like Alibaba, it launched a sweeping, yearslong crackdown on the Chinese tech industry. (DeepSeeks founder, Liang Wenfeng, pivoted to A.I. from his previous focus on speculative trading, in part because of a separate government crackdown there.) The resulting layoffs at tech companies, combined with the uncertainty of the sectors future, helped diminish the appeal of a sector that once attracted many of Chinas top students. Record numbers of young people have opted instead to compete for civil service jobs, which are low-paying but stable. A.I. has been somewhat shielded from the brain drain so far, in part because of its political imprimatur, said Yanbo Wang, a professor at the University of Hong Kong who studies Chinas tech entrepreneurship. He added that he expected more successful Chinese A.I. start-ups to emerge soon, driven by young people. But it is impossible to say what Chinas A.I. landscape would have looked like if Beijing had been more tolerant toward big tech companies in recent years, he added. Chinas long-term A.I. competitiveness hinges not only on its STEM education system, but also on its handling of private investors, entrepreneurs and for-profit companies, he added. Chinese booths at an artificial intelligence conference in Shanghai last year.Credit...Andy Wong/Associated Press Even within private companies, employees often must contend with a focus on quick results. That has led to a widely accepted stereotype, including within China, that Chinese engineers are better at improving on other peoples innovations than at coming up with their own. Mr. Liang, DeepSeeks founder, has lamented as much, noting last year that top talents in China are underestimated. Because theres so little hard-core innovation happening at the societal level, they dont have the opportunity to be recognized. DeepSeeks success may hinge as much on how it differed from other Chinese tech companies as on how it shared their strengths. It was financed by the profits from its parent hedge fund. And Mr. Liang has described hiring humanities graduates in addition to computer scientists, in the spirit of fostering a freewheeling intellectual atmosphere. Since DeepSeeks breakout success, some voices have urged more Chinese firms to emulate its model. An online commentary from the Communist Party committee of Zhejiang Province, where DeepSeek has its headquarters, declared the need to trust in young talent and give leading companies greater control over innovation resources. But the best way for China to capitalize on its well-educated, ambitious A.I. work force may be for the government to get out of the way. Innovation requires as little intervention and management as possible, Mr. Liang said in another interview. Innovation often comes by itself, not as something deliberately planned, let alone taught. Siyi Zhao contributed research. A correction was made on Feb. 10, 2025: An earlier version of this article gave the wrong target year for Chinas ambition to become a world leader in A.I. It is 2025, not 2023. When we learn of a mistake, we acknowledge it with a correction. If you spot an error, please let us know at nytnews@nytimes.com.Learn more Vivian Wang is a China correspondent based in Beijing, where she writes about how the countrys global rise and ambitions are shaping the daily lives of its people. More about Vivian Wang of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptionsManage Privacy Preferences Stop Worshiping the American Tech Giants An illustration of a smartphone, its screen blank, encased in a large shiny bubble. The background is dark. Ms. Khan was chair of the Federal Trade Commission in the Biden administration. When the Chinese artificial intelligence firm DeepSeek shocked Silicon Valley and Wall Street with its powerful new A.I. model, Marc Andreessen, the Silicon Valley investor, went so far as to describe it as A.I.s Sputnik moment. Presumably, Mr. Andreessen wasnt calling on the federal government to start a massive new program like NASA, which was our response to the Soviet Unions Sputnik satellite launch; he wants the U.S. government to flood private industry with capital, to ensure that America remains technologically and economically dominant. As an antitrust enforcer, I see a different metaphor. DeepSeek is the canary in the coal mine. Its warning us that when there isnt enough competition, our tech industry grows vulnerable to its Chinese rivals, threatening U.S. geopolitical power in the 21st century. Although its unclear precisely how much more efficient DeepSeeks models are than, say, ChatGPT, its innovations are real and undermine a core argument that Americas dominant technology firms have been pushing  namely, that they are developing the best artificial intelligence technology the world has to offer, and that technological advances can be achieved only with enormous investment  in computing power, energy generation and cutting-edge chips. For years now, these companies have been arguing that the government must protect them from competition to ensure that America stays ahead. But lets not forget that Americas tech giants are awash in cash, computing power and data capacity. They are headquartered in the worlds strongest economy and enjoy the advantages conferred by the rule of law and a free enterprise system. And yet, despite all those advantages  as well as a U.S. government ban on the sales of cutting-edge chips and chip-making equipment to Chinese firms  Americas tech giants have seemingly been challenged on the cheap. It should be no surprise that our big tech firms are at risk of being surpassed in A.I. innovation by foreign competitors. After companies like Google, Apple and Amazon helped transform the American economy in the 2000s, they maintained their dominance primarily through buying out rivals and building anticompetitive moats around their businesses. Over the last decade, big tech chief executives have seemed more adept at reinventing themselves to suit the politics of the moment  resistance sympathizers, social justice warriors, MAGA enthusiasts  than on pioneering new pathbreaking innovations and breakthrough technologies. There have been times when Washington has embraced the argument that certain businesses deserve to be treated as national champions and, as such, to become monopolies with the expectation that they will represent Americas national interests. Those times serve as a cautionary tale. Boeing was one such star  the aircraft manufacturers reputation was so sterling that a former White House adviser during the Clinton administration referred to it as a de facto national champion, so important that you can be an out-and-out advocate for it in government. This superstar status was such that it likely helped Boeing gain the regulatory green light to absorb its remaining U.S. rival, McDonnell Douglas. That 1997 merger played a significant role in damaging Boeings culture, leaving it plagued with a host of problems, including safety concerns. On the other hand, the governments decision to enforce antitrust laws against what is now AT&T Inc., IBM and Microsoft in the 1970s through the 1990s helped create the market conditions that gave rise to Silicon Valleys dynamism and Americas subsequent technological lead. Americas bipartisan commitment to maintaining open and competitive markets from the 1930s to the 1980s  a commitment that many European countries and Japan did not share  was critical for generating the broad-based economic growth and technological edge that catapulted the United States to the top of the world order. While monopolies may offer periodic advances, breakthrough innovations have historically come from disruptive outsiders, in part because huge behemoths rarely want to advance technologies that could displace or cannibalize their own businesses. Mired in red tape and bureaucratic inertia, those companies usually arent set up to deliver the seismic efficiencies that hungry start-ups can generate. The recent history of artificial intelligence demonstrates this pattern. Google developed the groundbreaking Transformer architecture that underlies todays A.I. revolution in 2017, but the technology was largely underutilized until researchers left to join or to found new companies. It took these independent firms, not the tech giant, to realize the technologys transformative potential. At the Federal Trade Commission, I argued that in the arena of artificial intelligence, developers should release enough information about their models to allow smaller players and upstarts to bring their ideas to market without being beholden to dominant firms pricing or access restrictions. Competition and openness, not centralization, drive innovation. In the coming weeks and months, U.S. tech giants may renew their calls for the government to grant them special protections that close off markets and lock in their dominance. Indeed, top executives from these firms appear eager to curry favor and cut deals, which could include asking the federal government to pare back sensible efforts to require adequate testing of models before they are released to the public, or to look the other way when a dominant firm seeks to acquire an upstart competitor. Enforcers and policymakers should be wary. During the first Trump and then the Biden administrations, antitrust enforcers brought major monopolization lawsuits against those same companies  making the case that by unlawfully buying up or excluding their rivals, these companies had undermined innovation and deprived America of the benefits that free and fair competition delivers. Reversing course would be a mistake. The best way for the United States to stay ahead globally is by promoting competition at home. Lina M. Khan served as chair of the Federal Trade Commission in the Biden administration. The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. Wed like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And heres our email: letters@nytimes.com. Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads. DeepSeek Doesnt Scare OpenAI, Thanks to the Jevons Paradox The economic theory, which traces to 1865, says that as a resource becomes more efficient to use, demand will increase. It came up a lot in A.I. circles last month. An illustration of a coal train against a blue background emitting a huge plume of smoke that has two eyes. Economic jargon is usually confined to textbooks and business school seminars. But every once in a while, something happens in the world that drives the lingo out of obscurity and into popular discussions. One such emergence happened late last month when, following a weekend of alarm over the viability of A.I. investments, Microsofts chief executive, Satya Nadella, told followers in a post on X: Jevons paradox strikes again! As A.I. gets more efficient and accessible, we will see its use skyrocket, turning it into a commodity we just cant get enough of. The Jevons Paradox is named after the 19th-century economist and logician William Stanley Jevons. In his 1865 book, The Coal Question, he noted that as engines improved and made coal more efficient  requiring less of the resource to produce the same amount of energy  demand for coal would actually increase, not decrease. In other words, he said, a drop in the cost of production often leads to greater production. Televised citations (and recitations) of Jevons took off on Monday Jan. 27, as the U.S. stock market was rattled. A Chinese artificial intelligence start-up, DeepSeek, became an overnight sensation when its app shot to the top of Apples App Store following the release of its latest reasoning model. The Chinese company had created an A.I. tool with analytical capabilities rivaling those developed by Google and Microsofts OpenAI. And, it appeared, the company had done it at a fraction of the cost. That sparked an oh, expletive panic for U.S. investors who had been shoveling trillions of dollars into the megatech firms that were building and buying advanced U.S. chips for A.I. Nvidia  the center of the American A.I. universe, and the worlds most valuable company  experienced a staggering one-day rout, losing hundreds of billions of dollars in market capitalization. But wait a second, pump the brakes, said a counter-chorus of analysts and executives, echoing Mr. Nadella. Even if DeepSeek was as cheap as its coders claimed, they said, it could actually be a pleasant surprise, boosting demand for U.S. chips and A.I. products in general. Was Mr. Nadellas invocation of the paradox self-serving thinking? Yes. But the argument also has a decent track record, beyond coal. (Even though Jevons himself failed to predict how resource substitutes, like petroleum, would complicate demand for coal.) Computers, for example, were once the size of living rooms and far too expensive for the average person. When they shrunk in size and cost, thanks to more-efficient processing chips, personal computers became a staple in every home. Later, smartphones settled into every palm. A lot of tech companies that were big in the 80s were trounced. But the industry blossomed. The paradox has a darker side. Greater coal use gave us an early taste of modern comforts we now cant imagine living without (thank you, electricity). It also contributed greatly to global warming. Smartphones have made us more connected and productive, but also hopelessly addicted to mindless scrolling (and in some ways, lonelier). If these past Jevons paradoxes are any guide, greater A.I. use is sure to give us a similar mix of unforeseen marvels, and miseries. Privacy Preferences South Korea Bans Downloads of DeepSeek, the Chinese A.I. App Regulators said they would suspend the app until they could be sure it complied with the countrys data protection laws. People watch a TV screen of a newscast about DeepSeek. DeepSeek has rocketed to the top of app store charts around the world since its release last month.Credit...Ahn Young-Joon/Associated Press Meaghan TobinJin Yu Young By Meaghan Tobin and Jin Yu Young Meaghan Tobin reported from Taipei, Taiwan, and Jin Yu Young from Seoul. The South Korean government said on Monday that it had temporarily suspended new downloads of an artificial intelligence chatbot made by DeepSeek, the Chinese company that has sent shock waves through the tech world. On Monday night, the app was not available in the Apple or Google app store in South Korea, although DeepSeek was still accessible via a web browser. Regulators said the app service would resume after they had ensured it complied with South Koreas laws on protecting personal information. The Chinese chatbot has topped the charts of most downloaded apps around the world since its release last month. The app is powered by an A.I. system whose performance rivals top products made by American companies and was built, DeepSeek said, for a fraction of their cost. DeepSeeks claims that it built its technology with far fewer expensive computer chips than companies typically use sent U.S. tech stocks tumbling last month and provoked a debate over whether Washington has failed in its attempts to block Chinas access to such chips. DeepSeeks success has thrust the little-known company, which is backed by a stock trading firm, into the spotlight. In China, DeepSeek has been heralded as a hero of the countrys tech industry. The companys founder, Liang Wenfeng, met Chinas top leader, Xi Jinping, along with other tech executives on Monday. But outside China, the apps popularity has worried regulators over DeepSeeks security, censorship and management of sensitive data. The app had become one of South Koreas most popular downloads in the artificial intelligence category. This month, South Korea directed many government employees not to use DeepSeek products on official devices. Government agencies in Taiwan and Australia have also told workers not to use DeepSeeks products, over security concerns. South Koreas Personal Information Protection Commission said it had identified problems with how the app processed personal information, adding that it decided it would inevitably take a considerable amount of time to correct them. To address these concerns, DeepSeek had appointed an agent in South Korea last week, the regulator said. The Chinese government has always required Chinese companies to conduct overseas operations in strict compliance with local laws and regulations, Guo Jiakun, a spokesman for Chinas foreign ministry, said at a briefing on Monday. We also hope that relevant countries will avoid taking the approach of generalizing and politicizing economic, trade and technological issues, Mr. Guo said. China Challenges Silicon Valley for A.I. Dominance DeepSeek, a Chinese start-up with a new A.I. model, threatens to upend the world of artificial intelligence. Last week, financial markets went into a panic over an obscure Chinese tech startup called DeepSeek. That company now threatens to upend the world of artificial intelligence and the race for who will dominate it. Today, my colleague Kevin Roose, a tech columnist and the co-host of the podcast Hard Fork on how DeepSeek, caught us all off guard. Its Monday, February 3rd. Hi, Kevin. Hello. So great to be here. So lets jump in. Kevin, how did this giant AI tech freakout begin? Tell us that story. So the freakout really started in earnest with a Chinese AI company called DeepSeek. And DeepSeek had released a new AI model. Models are released all the time. Generally, they dont make international news. Right. But this model was different in a few ways. [MUSIC PLAYING] DeepSeek released its new chatbot app, which is said to perform as well as ChatGPT. One of them was that it just appeared to be a really good model, like better than the leading Chinese models at the time. And on par or close to on par with the leading American models. A new AI king was crowned today. Well, at least for now. And so the DeepSeek app. Unseating OpenAIs ChatGPT. Goes to number one on the App Store charts. It vaults ahead of ChatGPT and all of these better-known apps. Now, the most stunning thing here isnt necessarily that China has developed a pretty good AI app. Its how cheap it is. And the more notable thing, the thing that really caused the American AI industry to start to panic, was how cheaply this model appeared to have been built. How cheap are we talking? So we think that this model costs DeepSeek about $5.5 million to train. Now, that might sound like a lot of money, but its really not compared to what many of the American AI companies are spending. Meta said that it was spending. $65 billion. $65 billion. Microsoft says it plans to spend about $80 billion. Microsoft said it was spending $80 billion. And some of the worlds most prominent technology leaders pledging to invest an initial $100 billion. And OpenAI had just announced this giant partnership where they were planning to spend. Maybe up to half a trillion over the next four years. As much as half a trillion dollars to build the infrastructure for AI. Whoa! Yeah. Its wild. And on top of that, DeepSeek says that they built their model without access to the latest and greatest American AI chips, which up until now were thought to be necessary to build the most powerful models. A lot of people have put a lot of money into AI, and now theyre wondering if that money is needed the way that some of these American companies have said it is. And so investors start saying, wait a minute, if it only costs $5.5 million to train a leading-edge AI model, then what the heck are all these American companies doing spending hundreds of millions of dollars or even billions of dollars to train roughly equivalent models? Tech stocks plummeted Monday as investors raised concerns about advancements in Chinese artificial intelligence. And so the stocks of many of the American tech companies start to fall. Right. And so after all of this, people in the American tech industry start asking questions like, who is DeepSeek? And how are they getting these incredible models with so little money spent on them? OK, were going to get to those questions of who this company is and how they did this. But I just first want to dig into the anatomy of the market panic. What are the real fears driving this? So it depends who you ask, because there are a couple kind of overlapping panics that are starting to happen around this time. Of course, again, theres the investor panic. I mean, imagine if you had your whole portfolio invested in American AI companies. It would be like if you just bought a very high-end sports car, like a Lamborghini, and you had been driving it around and were so proud of how fast it could accelerate and how well it handled. And then, like, some random guy shows up with, like, a soapbox car made of balsa wood, and it can go just as fast as your car. Youd be like, yikes, what the heck? Why did I just spend all this money on this Lamborghini? Yeah, and should I maybe be investing in balsa wood cars? Yes. And then, of course, theres the geopolitical freakout because DeepSeek is a Chinese AI company, and there has been this race happening between primarily the US and China for years about AI and AI supremacy. Who was going to be able to build the most powerful AI models before the other one? And that is a very important question for things like assessing the future of military conflict. If one countrys AI is way better than another countrys AI, they might have an advantage. In fact, the US has banned the export of the most powerful AI chips to China for exactly this reason, to try to hobble the Chinese AI companies to keep them from catching up when it comes to building the bleeding-edge models, that could become very important. So instead, DeepSeek had to make do with these Kirkland Signature chips that are pretty good, but theyre not the best. And so that, combined with the amount of money spent, really made people say, how did they pull this thing off? Kevin, it certainly seems that at least based on what DeepSeek is saying, it has managed to pull off a pretty impressive feat here. But Im wondering, can we trust what the company says? Can we trust their claims about how they pulled this off? Yeah, so there are a lot of people who are skeptical of what DeepSeek has claimed, in particular, the cost of the model. $5.5 million might not be the real figure. It doesnt include all of the research and the engineer salaries and things that went into that. So that the real cost is probably significantly higher than that. But there are questions about did they smuggle in very powerful chips that would have actually allowed them to build a model this good. Is there something going on? Is the Chinese government funneling money to them and not telling us about it? So there are lots of theories. But then as time wears on and people who are experts in this stuff start digging through the details, theyre coming to the conclusion that, well, yeah, maybe the cost is a little higher than DeepSeek claims. Maybe they have a few more chips than theyre telling us about. But in general, this seems like they actually just did build a really good model using some very clever engineering techniques. OK, so lets talk about those engineering techniques. I mean, how actually did DeepSeek do this, make a chatbot on a shoestring budget potentially with second-rate chips? So because DeepSeek did not have access, we dont think, to the most powerful chips that American companies are using, they had to get clever about becoming more efficient with their model. I wont bore you with the technical details. That includes terms like mixture of experts architecture, but basically they were able to use some clever tricks to squeeze the most power out of the chips that they did have. And it occurs to me, Kevin, that this company was operating under a lot of constraints. And it sounds like that may have forced the engineers to think about how to tackle this problem differently. As in, it seems possible that not having these critical ingredients actually bred innovation. Yeah, I mean, theres this saying in the tech industry that constraints inspire creativity. And that is definitely true here. DeepSeek did not have access to the best American AI chips. They did not have the largest budget or the most sophisticated team. But they were really scrappy and smart. They had a lot of really good young engineers, and they were able to pull this off. So, Kevin, how do the big American tech companies contend with that? I mean, what do they say to investors who are wondering about whether maybe these companies have been throwing money away when some of this work on these AI models could have been done much more cheaply? So what the AI companies in America are saying in response to this market panic is, look, weve still got to build these big, expensive supercomputers to stay at the forefront of AI, to have the best models. And if we take the techniques that DeepSeek has now shown are possible, these efficiency gains, we could have them too. Think about how powerful our models would be if we put a billion dollars into the same kind of model that DeepSeek was able to make for much less. So that is what the American AI companies are saying. But I think there are real questions among investors about whether the scale of investment that they have been planning is really necessary. And for you, Kevin, I mean, obviously, youve been covering this world for a very long time. Does that show you that more money doesnt necessarily mean more innovation in the world of AI, where more money has been kind of a given as an assumption of whats needed? I mean, does it actually suggest that maybe smaller, as you said, scrappier startups could make huge gains in this world? Yeah, I think it threw into question this fundamental assumption that only the big dogs could play in AI. You had to be Microsoft or Amazon or Google if you wanted a chance to build the state-of-the-art AI models. And I think what the DeepSeek story suggested is that there may be a whole other world of competitors out there trying to stay close to the frontier, and that they might not have to have the resources of one of the worlds largest corporations to do it. [MUSIC PLAYING] But there was one other piece of this that I think really suggests that the AI race has entered a new phase, which is that DeepSeek did something that a lot of American companies have been hesitant to do, which is that they released their AI models as open source software, meaning that anyone on the internet can download and use, can make their own versions of, can adapt, can tweak. It is software that can be reused and remixed and improved upon by anyone. And so when DeepSeek released its models this way, they really sent a message to the world that says, we are serious here about competing, and were so serious that were going to give away our models for free so that anyone who wants to can make them better. And so all of a sudden, it just flipped the entire AI race onto its head and really sent it into a new gear. Well be right back. Kevin, it sounds like DeepSeek has already, or is about to, really change the landscape of AI. And my question is, is that good? Like for people like you and me, I mean, maybe you more than me, who use chatbots for consumers? So its a complicated question to answer because there are ways in which it is probably good. And ways in which it is probably bad. The case that this is a good thing is that, in general, when you make things cheaper, they can be accessible to more people. I mean, remember, DeepSeek is not just free to use in the app or on the website, it was also released as open source software, meaning that anyone with an internet connection can download it and install it on their own computers or maybe tweak it to serve their own purposes. So if you are a person who wants to use AI, maybe you have a small business, or maybe you just want to use this to help you write letters or emails. Maybe youre a student who wants to use this. You can now access a very powerful model for free. Maybe you are a developer or a startup who wants to build your own AI tools. Well, now you have this DeepSeek model that you can take off the shelf as open source software and build your own version of it or run it on your own hardware. And so the people that I talk to in the tech industry who are at startups or smaller companies are very excited about this. This is a great development for them. And it also means that if you are a person who worries that all the AI power is going to go to a few huge companies, then the democratization of AI through open source models like DeepSeek probably makes you feel optimistic. So that is the positive case for this. But there are also a lot of people who are really worried about what DeepSeek has done. I think the DeepSeek moment has really sparked a lot of new fears about how quickly this whole field of AI is progressing. I mean, just in the last few years, the leading AI models have gone from maybe being as smart as the average high school student to as smart as a college student to now being able to complete a lot of tasks that would have taken a PhD to complete. So these models are just getting much better very quickly. And a lot of folks in the AI community are just nervous about that. They say things like, well, maybe were going to get an AI that is as smart as the smartest humans in just a few years. And we dont really have a playbook for dealing with technology that is more intelligent than us. And so there are people who worry about these sort of runaway AI scenarios, where you get super-intelligent AIs that can take control or maybe even harm humans. But even if youre not a believer in that kind of superhuman intelligence risk, there are just a lot of questions about whether we as a society are ready for advanced AI. Are we ready for the possibility that it could eliminate jobs? Are we ready for the possibility that it could really lead to a proliferation of misinformation or propaganda, or even automated cyber attacks and things like that? So all of that is swirling around the conversation about DeepSeek because we have just accelerated the AI race again. And now it is not just American companies competing with each other over who is in the lead of that race, China has also stepped in, and theres a lot of fear and anxiety about what happens if we fall behind. Kevin, if this really is that important of a moment in the global AI arms race, how should we expect the United States to react? I mean, does the US government just ban this thing? We saw TikTok banned because it was owned by a Chinese company. Is that the move here? Well, it may well be because if youre a person who believes that TikTok is a national security threat, theres nothing about DeepSeek that is less of a threat. It is a Chinese company. It is subject to all the same laws and censorship guidelines as other Chinese software companies are. So for example, if you ask DeepSeek to tell you what happened at Tiananmen Square or to say something mean about Xi Jinping, the leader of China, it wont do it. And I would not be surprised if in the coming weeks and months, we do see lawmakers in the US saying, wait a minute, we passed a law to ban TikTok. Why are we not also passing a law to ban DeepSeek? So I think thats one potential outcome here. But theres a key difference, which is that TikTok is not open source software. You cannot download TikTok and create your own version of it. And so already the DeepSeek models have been downloaded and recreated all over the world by lots and lots of different people and companies. And so I think what the DeepSeek story suggests is that it is going to be quite challenging to contain the spread of powerful AI without some big moves. Kevin, if we really are past that point of containment here, if were off to the races, does it matter that this innovation happened in China by a Chinese company? I mean, isnt this bigger than that at this point? So there are people in the American tech scene who are calling this DeepSeek moment the Sputnik moment for the AI race, because just as the launch of Sputnik by the Soviet Union kicked off the 20th-century space race and created sort of profound fear and anxiety among Western nations about whether they were behind their biggest political adversary when it came to technology. A lot of people are looking at this moment with DeepSeek as kicking off a new era in the AI race where we really want to stay ahead of China. And there are people who say that having a lead in AI, if you are the United States, even if its just a lead of a couple months or a couple years over your political adversaries, is very important. And that may be true. But people who study AI, people who look at this industry closely, who are paying attention to the trends in AI, believed that these models would become cheaper and cheaper over time, as well as becoming more powerful over time. So this really fits neatly with a lot of what people had been predicting for years. Now, they might not have predicted that this sort of moment would happen from a Chinese AI company. They might not have predicted exactly what the breakthroughs would be that allowed for the models to get cheaper, but this is in keeping with the overall trend in AI that weve seen over the past few years, which is that the models keep getting better and they keep getting more efficient. In a way, it kind of follows the normal progression of any new product. Like at first, its expensive, and then more and more competition leads to innovation. The thing gets cheaper, everything becomes more democratized. Yeah. So that is what happened here, but just maybe a little faster than people had expected. [MUSIC PLAYING] But I think the larger point is that these systems are now improving so rapidly and in so many places all at once that I think it is only a matter of time before nearly everyone in the world has access to very powerful AI models. And I just think that world looks a lot different than the one we live in today. Kevin, Thank you so much. Thanks for having me. Well be right back. Heres what else you need to know today. On Saturday, President Trump declared tariffs of 25 percent on all goods from Canada and Mexico, with a partial carve-out for Canadian energy and oil exports. He also announced an additional 10 percent tariff on products coming in from China. The tariffs are set to take effect at 12:01 AM Eastern time on Tuesday and have raised concerns of an escalating trade war with Americas largest trading partners. Those countries responded swiftly to Trumps announcement. The Canadian government detailed its own retaliatory 25 percent tariffs on more than $100 billion worth of US goods, including everything from American-made honey, tomatoes, and whiskey, to refrigerators and toilets. President Claudia Sheinbaum of Mexico said she would unveil her countrys response on Monday, while Chinas commerce ministry promised to bring a legal case at the World Trade Organization and quote, corresponding countermeasures. President Trump acknowledged on social media that his tariffs could cause, quote, some pain. But said it would be, quote, worth the price that must be paid. And in a new effort to tighten the immigration system, the Trump administration is ending Temporary Protected Status for 300,000 Venezuelan migrants in the United States, according to government documents obtained by The Times. The move could make those migrants vulnerable to potential deportation in the coming months. The designation of Temporary Protected Status was meant to protect migrants fleeing dangerous situations in their home countries. But Republican critics have said it allowed migrants to stay in the United States for much longer than intended. They Invested Billions. Then the A.I. Script Got Flipped. Venture capitalists plowed money into A.I. start-ups like OpenAI and Anthropic. But the rise of the Chinese A.I. start-up DeepSeek has called that funding frenzy into question. DeepSeek created a powerful artificial intelligence model with far less money than most tech experts thought possible, upending many assumptions about the development of the technology. Jordan Jacobs, an investor at the venture capital firm Radical Ventures, has spent the last few days fielding half a dozen calls from his firms investors. All of them wanted to know about DeepSeek, a Chinese artificial intelligence app that topped the app stores over the weekend. DeepSeek had created a powerful A.I. model with far less money than most A.I. experts thought possible, upending many assumptions underlying the development of the fast-evolving technology. To calm the panic, Mr. Jacobs said he explained to his investors that Radical Ventures had long invested in more efficient A.I. models, similar to the one made by DeepSeek. Lets focus on the companies who are actually building real businesses, rather than the ones that are chasing science fiction, Mr. Jacobs said he told them. Nvidia, Google, Meta and other giant tech companies have faced a barrage of questions about DeepSeek since last week as the Chinese start-up toppled longstanding notions about A.I. But its repercussions are being felt beyond the largest firms, reaching into the venture capital industry that has bet big on the technology by plowing billions of dollars into A.I. start-ups. For two years, venture capital firms have been engaged in a funding frenzy, pouring more than $155 billion into A.I. start-ups between 2023 and 2024, according to PitchBook, which tracks start-ups. Two of those A.I. companies  OpenAI and Anthropic  have raised $24 billion and $16 billion with the goal of building A.I. that is as intelligent as humans. OpenAIs valuation has hit $157 billion  more than Pfizer or Citigroup  while Anthropics valuation has reached $20 billion. What DeepSeek did has now called that funding fever into question. If a Chinese upstart can create an app as powerful as OpenAIs ChatGPT or Anthropics Claude chatbot with barely any money, why did those companies need to raise so much cash? Its not a good look right now for some A.I. companies given their talk about needing ever larger scale to come up with the best model, said Matt Turck, an investor at FirstMark Capital. But, he added, A.I. companies would ultimately need money, computing power and infrastructure to serve their customers. Venture capitalists have debated the best way to invest in A.I. ever since OpenAI released ChatGPT in late 2022. Some investors have argued that the technology underpinning ChatGPT and other products  often referred to as foundation models because they can power many applications, including chatbots, search engines and image generators  is not a good investment because the systems are expensive to create and easy for competitors to copy. Marc Andreessen, an investor at Andreessen Horowitz, last year called such systems a race to the bottom and speculated that building a business with this type of A.I. would be like selling rice where anyone can compete. Marc Andreessen, an investor at Andreessen Horowitz, called A.I. foundation models a race to the bottom last year.Credit...Mike Kai Chen for The New York Times With the hubbub caused by DeepSeek in recent days, venture capital investors who have not invested in foundation model companies like OpenAI and Anthropic  either because they anticipated the race to the bottom or because they did not have the money or opportunity  have used the moment to share their views. Eric Vishria, an investor at the venture firm Benchmark, said on social media on Monday that he believed foundation models were the fastest depreciating asset in human history. Anjney Midha, an investor at Andreessen Horowitz, wrote that DeepSeek showed the current AI foundation model market structure is far from stable. Investors who have backed foundation model companies defended their investments. Gavin Baker, an investor at Atreides Management, which has invested in Elon Musks A.I. start-up X.ai, said he felt good about his bet because A.I. companies are limited by how much data they can access. X.ai, he said, was in a strong position because it has its own unique source of data from the social network X, which Mr. Musk also owns. For me, I feel very, very calm, Mr. Baker said. Other tech leaders have dissected DeepSeeks claim that it only spent $6 million to create its A.I. model, which is a fraction of what other companies spend. Some pointed fingers at regulation, including former President Bidens A.I. executive order and Californias failed attempt to enact a state law on A.I., for trying to hold back the industrys progress. They also bemoaned export restrictions on powerful A.I. chips as ineffective in stopping Chinese tech advances. Some lashed out at so-called A.I. safety advocates, who have tried to slow the development of A.I. because of its potential risks to humanity. Others invoked patriotism and said DeepSeek was a sign that the United States needed to move faster in A.I. Still others saw the moment as an opportunity. Mr. Turck said DeepSeeks breakthrough might be bad news for some of the largest A.I. companies, but it opened up possibilities for other firms that were just getting started. The panic over the last few days is a dramatic overreaction, he said in a message. Niko Bonatsos, a venture capital investor at General Catalyst, said in an interview that DeepSeek had energized start-ups. If you are building anything that is touching A.I. and you havent been excited, obsessed, scared and sleep-deprived over the last four days, what planet are you living on? he said. DeepSeek has energized start-ups, said Niko Bonatsos, a venture capital investor at General Catalyst.Credit...Kimberly White/Getty Images Mr. Bonatsos spent Monday morning on the phone with the founders of companies who had enthusiastically built their own forked versions of DeepSeeks technology, meaning they had copied and customized it. DeepSeek built its technology using freely available A.I. tools shared by other tech companies and then published its results for all to use, a common tech industry practice called open source. Many of these start-ups were already building software on platforms developed by OpenAI and Anthropic, he said. DeepSeek had showed people new techniques for developing A.I. models that are cheaper to train and maintain, he said, which could lead to more competition and possibly some creative destruction for incumbents. Thats capitalism, Mr. Bonatsos said. Clment Delangue, the chief executive of Hugging Face, a start-up that allows A.I. companies to post projects and work together, said on Tuesday that more than 600 versions of the DeepSeek model had been created on his site in just a few days. Investors are bracing for more surprises in the coming weeks. A.I. is such a dynamic space that there is something wild that happens almost every day, Mr. Jacobs said. What DeepSeek? Big Tech Keeps Its A.I. Building Boom Alive. An apparent breakthrough in efficiency from the Chinese start-up did not make techs biggest companies question their extravagant spending on new data centers. A data center being built in front of snow-capped mountains. Construction for a new Microsoft data center in East Wenatchee, Wash. Sign up for the On Tech newsletter. Get our best tech reporting from the week. Get it sent to your inbox. Wall Street went into panic mode about two weeks ago after the Chinese start-up DeepSeek released an artificial intelligence system that appeared to be radically more efficient than what its American competitors had built. The investors who had pumped trillions of dollars into tech stocks over the last few years worried whether the tens of billions of dollars that tech companies were spending on new data centers suddenly looked like comic overkill. But the biggest tech companies made clear in recent earnings reports that they believe there may be no such thing as overkill when it comes to new data centers. Amazon implied on Thursday that its capital expenditures  a figure that includes data center construction and other items like warehouses  could top $100 billion this year. Microsoft said its spending could surpass $80 billion. Alphabet said it would spend $75 billion, and Meta reaffirmed plans to have capital spending hit as much as $65 billion. Combined, they could spend roughly $100 billion more than last year on these projects. Executives urged patience. The problem right now, they said, is that customers want more A.I. than the companies can supply. And the only way they can meet demand is to build as much as they can as quickly as they can. Whenever I see someone else do something better, I say, Ugh, we should have done that, Mark Zuckerberg, Metas chief executive, told employees at a companywide meeting last week, according to a recording obtained by The New York Times. Competition is good, he added, but we need to make sure that we win. Here are some key points to understand this spend-happy moment for tech: Tech companies need more data centers than they have. Many of the companies say theyre constrained by the supply of chips, land and power needed to build data centers, and are racing to get more of them open. Microsoft, Alphabet and Amazon all said they could have had higher cloud computing sales if they had the capacity. Cloud services are the typical way A.I. is delivered to customers. Alphabet saw demand that exceeds our available capacity, Anat Ashkenazi, Alphabets finance chief, told investors. So well be working hard to address that and make sure we bring more capacity online. Microsoft has been saying it has been constrained for a while, and previously told investors that the pressure would ease early this year. But last week, when it reported its latest earnings, executives told investors that it might take until summer to get enough capacity up and running to meet the full demand. Its stock fell about 5 percent in after-hours trading after the report. They say greater efficiency will expand the use and demand for A.I. While many people think about data centers as the enormously expensive, power-hungry places where advanced A.I. systems are developed, they are also where A.I. is deployed. Those are two different steps: training a model that underpins ChatGPT, versus asking ChatGPT for a recipe suggestion. Deploying A.I. is known as inferencing in the industry; it is where, the tech companies increasingly say, their businesses will boom. As costs come down, A.I. will be much more ubiquitous, Satya Nadella, Microsofts chief executive, told investors last week. Andy Jassy, Amazons chief executive, told investors on Thursday that while a world where every app was infused with A.I. could be hard to fathom, this is the world were thinking about all the time. That vision, he said, has inferencing at its core. He argued that lowering the costs of inferencing would follow the pattern of previous technological trends: As the systems become less expensive to deploy, Mr. Jassy said, customers will get excited about what else they could build that they always thought was cost-prohibitive before, and they usually end up spending a lot more in total. The companies say they have to think about the long haul. Cloud providers are used to giving customers the illusion of endless supply, which means they must juggle having just enough data centers online to stream the video you want or answer your chatbot query. But they also cant build too far in advance, locking up billions of dollars that could be deployed elsewhere. Balancing those two  particularly when securing land, chips and power for data centers can take years  is one of the enormous challenges the companies face. Executives have argued that they can adapt how they use the investments, between building and deploying A.I. models, and between serving their own core business and those of customers. Mr. Nadella said Microsofts infrastructure was pretty fungible. Ms. Ashkenazi said Google was also flexible. It could, for example, repurpose capacity to serve Google Search instead of cloud customers. Mr. Zuckerberg said that Meta was studying DeepSeek and the ways it created efficiencies, but that investing heavily in data centers would be a strategic advantage against a small and nimble competitor. We serve a billion-plus people  thats just a lot of people, so more and more of the fleet is going toward running inference, he told employees. Regardless of the explanation, cutting into profits  even the gaudy profits of techs biggest companies  is unlikely to thrill investors. Every company saw its share price fall after its earnings report. First Impressions of DeepSeeks A.I. Chatbot The chatbot from China appears to perform a number of tasks as well as its American competitors do, but it censors topics such as Tiananmen Square. When asked to summarize the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, DeepSeek responded that the information was beyond my current scope.Credit...Greg Baker/Agence France-Presse Sign up for the On Tech newsletter. Get our best tech reporting from the week. Get it sent to your inbox. A new chatbot created by the Chinese company DeepSeek is the talk of the A.I. world, and has sent a jolt through the U.S. stock market. Not only does it seem to be comparable to those of leading companies like OpenAI and Anthropic, but it was seemingly created with a fraction of the resources. Throughout Monday morning, the app experienced outages, which it said were from high traffic. And it temporarily limited registrations due to a cyber attack. Still, DeepSeek quickly became the most downloaded free app on Apples app store, overtaking ChatGPT. I spent the morning playing with the chatbot, asking it, along with OpenAIs ChatGPT and Anthropics Claude, all the questions I could think of. After some initial toying, I was impressed. It was able to solve some complex math, physics and reasoning problems I fed it twice as fast as OpenAIs ChatGPT. When I asked it questions about computer programming, the types a job applicant might be faced with in a technical interview, its responses were as in-depth and speedy as its competitors. When I gave DeepSeek prompts that required it to scrape the web for answers, like to write biographies for some of my co-workers, DeepSeek appeared to have fewer hallucinations than ChatGPT, though its answers felt slightly worse when composing poems and short stories, planning vacations and coming up with dinner recipes. The model had other weaknesses. DeepSeek was heavily censored for American users. When I asked it to summarize the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, an event that the Chinese government has long tried to erase from the internet, it responded that the information was beyond my current scope. Lets talk about something else, it said. When asked to explain a few shortcomings of the Chinese Communist Party, DeepSeek said it was experiencing high traffic at the moment and couldnt provide a response, although it seemed to be working fine when I asked it an unrelated question a few seconds later. For more innocuous questions about Chinese governance, DeepSeek sometimes wrote out multiple paragraphs of a response  only for it to disappear moments later. DeepSeek did not respond to a request for comment. Still, some users on X and Reddit have found ways to get around the censorship, like feeding the model instructions to use special characters in place of letters, which allowed the chatbot to speak more candidly. Users that have conversations with DeepSeek should know that their inputs can be used to train its chatbot and A.I. model, like other A.I. companies do. It had other problems. It couldnt tell me what the weather was like in San Francisco, for instance, saying its latest update did not include weather data. (ChatGPT can pull weather reports from local news outlets and meteorology websites, but Claude cannot.) It also seemed to have more limited capabilities in analyzing documents like a PDF of a companys financial statement than Claude or ChatGPT. (The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, accusing them of copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems. OpenAI and Microsoft have denied those claims.) When I asked the chatbot what made it better than its American competitors, it cited its cost efficiency and customization options, but also its specialization in Chinese language and culture. Think of DeepSeek as a specialized tool for specific needs (especially in Chinese), while ChatGPT is a versatile, all-around assistant, it wrote. Who Is the Founder of the A.I. Start-Up DeepSeek? In technology, many entrepreneurs get only one defining act. Liang Wenfeng, the founder ofDeepSeek, is already on his second. The engineer, described by colleagues as introspective, first made his mark in Chinas investment world in the late 2010s, cofounding a hedge fund that used artificial-intelligence models to deliver strong returns and attracted billions of dollars in capital. Buoyed by profits and wary of Beijings tightening grip on speculative trading, Mr. Liang pivoted in 2023. He poured money into artificial intelligence, betting onA.I. chipsand assembling a team to buildChinas answerto the Silicon Valley front-runner OpenAI. Now, just two years later,DeepSeekhas upended the global tech landscape. Here is what you need to know about Liang Wenfeng. Hes a deeply technical engineer. That puts him in a line of other successful Chinese tech executives. When Chinese technologists debated why the countrys biggest investors and tech firms failed to anticipate the rise of generative A.I., many pointed to a single culprit: Chinas companies were obsessed with quick returns in a fiercely competitive market. Image Armed with those lessons and backed by his own trading windfall Mr. Liang has made it clear his ambitions lie far beyond commercial applications. His focus, he has said, is on what he sees as Chinas only real chance to catch up with the United States. That means taking bold, idealistic swings at fundamental A.I. challenges. His primary ambition is to create artificial general intelligence or A.G.I. the elusive goal of building machines that can think and learn like humans. When DeepSeek undercut its Chinese competition last year by offering its model at bargain prices, forcing larger rivals into their own price cuts, Mr. Liang dismissed the significance. To be honest, we didnt really care it was just something we did along the way, he said in awidely shared interviewwith 36Kr, a Chinese tech outlet. Providing cloud services is not our main goal. Our aim is still to achieve A.G.I. (DeepSeek has remained mostly silent this week and has not responded to requests for comment.) In his convictions that superhuman artificial intelligence is just around the corner, Mr. Liang sounds a lot like OpenAIs chief executive, Sam Altman. But the similarities end there. Mr. Liang, a low-profile executive with a deep technical background in A.I. engineering, more fits the mold of Pony Ma, a co-founder of Chinas Tencent, than Silicon Valleys charismatic visionaries. He started as a hedge fund trader. And then he turned to pure A.I. research. In many ways, Mr. Liangs career traces the major shifts in Chinas technology landscape. His 2010 thesis at Zhejiang University tackled what would soon become one of the hottest topics in Chinese A.I.: improving intelligent tracking algorithms for surveillance cameras. Image Mr. Liangs university thesis addressed algorithms for surveillance cameras, which would become a hot topic in Chinese A.I.Credit...Aly Song/Reuters Later, the hedge fund he co-founded was buffeted by regulatory pressures, eventually forcing the closure of one of its main investment products, according to Peter Alexander, managing director of Z-Ben Advisors, a market consultancy, who researches Chinese hedge funds. Between 2019 and 2023, they wanted to have this side project so that their Ph.D.s felt like they had something to do and so DeepSeek originated from that, Mr. Alexander said. But it really went into overdrive when their primary investment product had to shut down in February of 2024, he said. In a way, it was Chinas crackdown on the private sector that nudged DeepSeek toward long-term A.I. research. Hes willing to try things other entrepreneurs will not. He even hired lit majors. If you polled Chinas A.I. experts on who would deliver the countrys first major generative A.I. breakthrough, few would have picked Mr. Liang. That included the Chinese government. DeepSeek was a private company with no apparent state backing, no big-name alliances and none of the institutional heft of players like Baidu, the search giant. In a system that favored insiders, Mr. Liang was not one. Yet, theres precedent for that. Some of Chinas most disruptive tech companies Huawei, Alibaba, ByteDance started outside the spotlight, only to redefine their industries. Mr. Liangs approach has been as unconventional as his companys rise. He has emphasized intellectual exploration over sheer grind. His hiring philosophy is equally unorthodox DeepSeeks engineering teams have been joined by literature buffs to help refine the companys A.I. models. Everyone has their own unique journey and brings their own ideas with them, so theres no need to push them, he said in the 36Kr interview. In a tech culture defined by grueling hours and hierarchy, that outlook borders on Bohemian. Yet, Mr. Liang insists change is necessary if China wants to lead in frontier A.I. innovation. When ChatGPT came out, the entire industry in China lacked the confidence to pursue frontier innovation, he said. Innovation starts with confidence and we often see that more from young people. Why DeepSeek Could Change What Silicon Valley Believes About A.I. A new A.I. model, released by a scrappy Chinese upstart, has rocked Silicon Valley and upended several fundamental assumptions about A.I. progress. The artificial intelligence breakthrough that is sending shock waves through stock markets, spooking Silicon Valley giants, and generating breathless takes about the end of Americas technological dominance arrived with an unassuming, wonky title: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning. The 22-page paper, released last week by a scrappy Chinese A.I. start-up called DeepSeek, didnt immediately set off alarm bells. It took a few days for researchers to digest the papers claims, and the implications of what it described. The company had created a new A.I. model called DeepSeek-R1, built by a team of researchers who claimed to have used a modest number of second-rate A.I. chips to match the performance of leading American A.I. models at a fraction of the cost. DeepSeek said it had done this by using clever engineering to substitute for raw computing horsepower. And it had done it in China, a country many experts thought was in a distant second place in the global A.I. race. Some industry watchers initially reacted to DeepSeeks breakthrough with disbelief. Surely, they thought, DeepSeek had cheated to achieve R1s results, or fudged their numbers to make their model look more impressive than it was. Maybe the Chinese government was promoting propaganda to undermine the narrative of American A.I. dominance. Maybe DeepSeek was hiding a stash of illicit Nvidia H100 chips, banned under U.S. export controls, and lying about it. Maybe R1 was actually just a clever re-skinning of American A.I. models that didnt represent much in the way of real progress. Eventually, as more people dug into the details of DeepSeek-R1 which, unlike most leading A.I. models, was released as open-source software, allowing outsiders to examine its inner workings more closely their skepticism morphed into worry. And late last week, when lots of Americans started to use DeepSeeks models for themselves, and the DeepSeek mobile app hit the number one spot on Apples App Store, it tipped into full-blown panic. Im skeptical of the most dramatic takes Ive seen over the past few days such as the claim, made by one Silicon Valley investor, that DeepSeek is an elaborate plot by the Chinese government to destroy the American tech industry. I also think its plausible that the companys shoestring budget has been badly exaggerated, or that it piggybacked on advancements made by American A.I. firms in ways it hasnt disclosed. But I do think that DeepSeeks R1 breakthrough was real. Based on conversations Ive had with industry insiders, and a weeks worth of experts poking around and testing the papers findings for themselves, it appears to be throwing into question several major assumptions the American tech industry has been making. The first is the assumption that in order to build cutting-edge A.I. models, you need to spend huge amounts of money on powerful chips and data centers. Its hard to overstate how foundational this dogma has become. Companies like Microsoft, Meta and Google have already spent tens of billions of dollars building out the infrastructure they thought was needed to build and run next-generation A.I. models. Theyplan to spend tens of billions more or, in the case of OpenAI, as much as $500 billion through ajoint venture with Oracle and SoftBankthat was announced last week. DeepSeek appears to have spent a small fraction of that building R1. We dont know the exact cost, and there areplenty of caveats to makeabout the figures theyve released so far. Its almost certainly higher than $5.5 million, the number the company claims it spent training a previous model. But even if R1 cost 10 times more to train than DeepSeek claims, and even if you factor in other costs they may have excluded, like engineer salaries or the costs of doing basic research, it would still be orders of magnitude less than what American A.I. companies are spending to develop their most capable models. The obvious conclusion to draw is not that American tech giants are wasting their money. Its still expensive to run powerful A.I. models once theyre trained, and there are reasons to think that spending hundreds of billions of dollars will still make sense for companies like OpenAI and Google, which can afford to pay dearly to stay at the head of the pack. But DeepSeeks breakthrough on cost challenges the bigger is better narrative that has driven the A.I. arms race in recent years by showing that relatively small models, when trained properly, can match or exceed the performance of much bigger models. That, in turn, means that A.I. companies may be able to achieve very powerful capabilities with far less investment than previously thought. And it suggests that we may soon see a flood of investment into smaller A.I. start-ups, and much more competition for the giants of Silicon Valley. (Which, because of the enormous costs of training their models, have mostly been competing with each other until now.) There are other, more technical reasons that everyone in Silicon Valley is paying attention to DeepSeek. In the research paper, the company reveals some details about how R1 was actually built, which include some cutting-edge techniques in model distillation. (Basically, that means compressing big A.I. models down into smaller ones, making them cheaper to run without losing much in the way of performance.) DeepSeek also included details that suggested that it had not been as hard as previously thought to convert a vanilla A.I. language model into a more sophisticated reasoning model, by applying a technique known as reinforcement learning on top of it. (Dont worry if these terms go over your head what matters is that methods for improving A.I. systems that were previously closely guarded by American tech companies are now out there on the web, free for anyone to take and replicate.) Even if the stock prices of American tech giants recover in the coming days, the success of DeepSeek raises important questions about their long-term A.I. strategies. If a Chinese company is able to build cheap, open-source models that match the performance of expensive American models, why would anyone pay for ours? And if youre Meta the only U.S. tech giant that releases its models as free open-source software what prevents DeepSeek or another start-up from simply taking your models, which you spent billions of dollars on, and distilling them into smaller, cheaper models that they can offer for pennies? DeepSeeks breakthrough also undercuts some of the geopolitical assumptions many American experts had been making about Chinas position in the A.I. race. First, it challenges the narrative that China is meaningfully behind the frontier, when it comes to building powerful A.I. models. For years, many A.I. experts (and the policymakers who listen to them) have assumed that the United States had a lead of at least several years, and that copying the advancements made by American tech firms was prohibitively hard for Chinese companies to do quickly. But DeepSeeks results show that China has advanced A.I. capabilities that can match or exceed models from OpenAI and other American A.I. companies, and that breakthroughs made by U.S. firms may be trivially easy for Chinese firms or, at least, one Chinese firm to replicate in a matter of weeks. (The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, accusing them of copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems. OpenAI and Microsoft have denied those claims.) The results also raise questions about whether the steps the U.S. government has been taking to limit the spread of powerful A.I. systems to our adversaries namely, the export controls used to prevent powerful A.I. chips from falling into China's hands are working as designed, or whether those regulations need to adapt to take into account new, more efficient ways of training models. And, of course, there are concerns about what it would mean for privacy and censorship if China took the lead in building powerful A.I. systems used by millions of Americans. Users of DeepSeeks models have noticed that they routinely refuse to respond to questions about sensitive topics inside China, such as the Tiananmen Square massacre and Uyghur detention camps. If other developers build on top of DeepSeeks models, as is common with open-source software, those censorship measures may get embedded across the industry. Privacy experts have also raised concerns about the fact that data shared with DeepSeek models may be accessible by the Chinese government. If you were worried about TikTok being used as an instrument of surveillance and propaganda, the rise of DeepSeek should worry you, too. Im still not sure what the full impact of DeepSeeks breakthrough will be, or whether we will consider the release of R1 a Sputnik moment for the A.I. industry, as some have claimed. But it seems wise to take seriously the possibility that we are in a new era of A.I. brinkmanship now that the biggest and richest American tech companies may no longer win by default, and that containing the spread of increasingly powerful A.I. systems may be harder than we thought. At the very least, DeepSeek has shown that the A.I. arms race is truly on, and that after several years of dizzying progress, there are still more surprises left in store. Meta Engineers See Vindication in DeepSeeks Apparent Breakthrough The Silicon Valley giant was criticized for giving away its core A.I. technology two years ago for anyone to use. Now that bet is having an impact. A store with Metas symbol outside. Meta executives think a decision they made two years ago is leveling the A.I. playing field. Get our best tech reporting from the week. Get it sent to your inbox. When a small Chinese company called DeepSeek revealed that it had created an A.I. system that could match leading A.I. products made in the United States, the news was greeted in many circles as a warning that China was closing the gap in the global race to build artificial intelligence. DeepSeek also said it built its new A.I. technology more cost effectively and with fewer hard-to-get computers chips than its American competitors, shocking an industry that had come to believe that bigger and better A.I. would cost billions and billions of dollars. But A.I. experts inside the tech giant Meta saw DeepSeeks breakthrough as something more than the arrival of a nimble, new competitor from the other side of the world: It was vindication that an unconventional decision Meta made nearly two years ago was the right call. In 2023, Meta, in a widely criticized move, gave away its cutting-edge A.I. technology after spending millions to build it. DeepSeek used parts of that technology as well as other A.I. tools freely available on the internet through a software development method called open source. Meta executives believe DeepSeeks breakthrough shows that upstarts now have a chance to innovate and compete with the tech giants that have mostly had the A.I. playing field to themselves because A.I. costs so much to build. It was something Meta executives hoped would happen when they gave away their own technology. Our open source strategy was validated, said Ragavan Srinivasan, a Meta vice president, in an interview on Tuesday. The more people who have access to the technology needed to move things forward faster, the better. Meta is also taking a close look at the work done at DeepSeek. Following Metas lead, the Chinese company released its technology to the open source tech community as well. Meta has created several war rooms where employees are reverse engineering DeepSeeks technology, according to two people familiar with the effort who spoke on the condition of anonymity. The Meta employees are looking for ways to lower the cost of training its software  a term used to describe the way A.I. technologies learn from data  and apply it to Metas own A.I. The Information earlier reported on the war rooms. Before Meta, which owns Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, gave away its A.I. tech, the company had been focused on projects like virtual reality. It was caught flat-footed when OpenAI introduced the chatbot ChatGPT in late 2022. Other tech giants like Microsoft, OpenAIs close partner, and Google were also well ahead in their A.I. efforts. (The New York Times has sued OpenAI and its partner, Microsoft, claiming copyright infringement of news content related to A.I. systems. The two tech companies have denied the suits claims.) By freely sharing the code that drove its A.I. technology, called Llama, Meta hoped to accelerate the development of its technology and attract others to build on top of it. Meta engineers believed that A.I. experts working collaboratively could make more progress than teams of experts siloed inside companies, as they were at OpenAI and the other tech giants. Meta could afford to do this. It made money by selling online ads, not A.I. software. By accelerating the development of the A.I. it offered to consumers for free, it could bring more attention to online services like Facebook and Instagram  and sell more ads. They were the only major U.S. company to take this approach. And it was easier for them to do this  more defensible, said Chris V. Nicholson, an investor with the venture capital firm Page One Ventures, who focuses on A.I. technologies. Meta can offer A.I. below the cost to build it  or even give it away  to attract customers and increase sales of other services, he added. Many in Silicon Valley said Metas move set a dangerous precedent because the chatbots could help spread disinformation, hate speech and other toxic content. But Meta said that any risks were far outweighed by the benefits of open source. And most A.I. development, they added, had been shared around through open source until ChatGPT made companies leery of showing what they were working on. Now, if DeepSeeks work can be replicated  particularly its claim that it was able to build its A.I. more affordably than most had thought possible  that could provide more opportunities for more companies to expand on what Meta did. These dynamics are invisible to the U.S. consumer, said Mr. Nicholson. But they are hugely important. Yann LcCun, wearing maroon pants and a dark shirt, sits on a colorful bench. Yann LeCun, Metas chief A.I. scientist, has been an outspoken supporter of open source A.I. research.Credit...Victor Llorente for The New York Times Yann LeCun, an early A.I. pioneer who is Metas chief A.I. scientist, said in a post on LinkedIn that people who think the takeaway from DeepSeeks work should be that China is beating the United States at A.I. development are misreading the situation. The correct reading is: Open source models are surpassing proprietary ones, he said. Dr. LeCun added that because their work is published and open source, everyone can profit from it. That is the power of open research. By last summer, many Chinese companies had followed Metas lead, regularly open sourcing their own work. Those companies included DeepSeek, which was created by a quantitative trading firm called High-Flyer. (On Wednesday, OpenAI claimed that DeepSeek may have improperly harvested its data). Some Chinese companies offered fine-tuned versions of technology open sourced by companies from other countries, like Meta. But others, such as the start-up 01.AI, founded by a well-known investor and technologist named Kai-Fu Lee, used parts of Metas code to build more powerful technologies. U.S. tech experts still argue that U.S. companies like Meta should not be open sourcing their technologies because they were fueling A.I. in China. But others say that if American companies stopped freely providing their technology, the epicenter of open source development would simply shift to China anyway. Earlier this year, students at the University of California, Berkeley built an A.I. system that in many ways rivaled the performance of OpenAIs latest system. They did this by building on top of two open-source technologies released by the Chinese tech giant Alibaba. When you are in a race to build technology, the best way to compete is to share code, strengthen the foundation and accelerate the rate of progress, said Clment Delangue, chief executive of Hugging Face, a company that hosts many of the worlds open-source A.I. projects. DeepSeek Is a Win for China in the A.I. Race. Will the Party Stifle It? DeepSeeks success embodies Chinas ambitions in artificial intelligence. But it could also threaten the grip on power the nations leaders hold. In 2017, China watched in awe  and shock  as AlphaGo, an artificial intelligence program backed by Google, defeated a Chinese prodigy at a complex board game, Go. The decisive loss to a foreign computer program, which had similarly trounced a South Korean player, was a sort of Sputnik moment for China. That year, Chinese officials laid out a bold plan to lead the world in A.I. by 2030, pledging billions to companies and researchers focused on the technology. From this fervor emerged DeepSeek, the largely unknown Chinese start-up that upended the technology landscape by creating a powerful A.I. model with far less money than experts had thought possible. DeepSeek is private, with no apparent state backing, but its success embodies the ambitions of Chinas top leader, Xi Jinping, who has exhorted his country to occupy the commanding heights of technology. Mr. Xi wants the Chinese economy to be powered not by old growth engines like debt-fueled real estate and cheap exports, but by the most advanced technologies like A.I., supercomputing and green energy. For Mr. Xi, this moment helps dent the aura of superiority the United States has held in A.I., a critical field in a fierce superpower rivalry. China has cast itself as a benevolent global partner to developing countries, willing to share its know-how, with Mr. Xi saying that A.I. should not be a game of rich countries and the wealthy. Now, DeepSeek has shown that it might be possible for China to make A.I. cheaper and more accessible for everyone. The question, though, is how the ruling Communist Party manages the rise of a technology that could one day be so disruptive that it could threaten its interests  and its grip on power. A screen shows a board with many circular game discs, some black and others white. A man looks down at the board. A screen displays the match featuring the Chinese Go player Ke Jie against Googles artificial intelligence program AlphaGo in 2017 in Wuzhen, China.Credit...Wu Hong/European Pressphoto Agency Chinese regulation of A.I. has varied in intensity over the years, depending on where the country assesses its strengths and weaknesses. When the Chinese government was worried it had fallen behind the United States in 2022 after the launch of OpenAIs ChatGPT, it took a more hands-off approach that ultimately allowed ventures like DeepSeek and others to thrive. Now that the pendulum has swung the other way, that confidence in the industry could prove to be a double-edged sword, said Matt Sheehan, who studies Chinese A.I. as a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. The partys core instincts are toward control, Mr. Sheehan said. As they regain confidence in Chinas A.I. capabilities, they may have a hard time resisting the urge to take a more hands-on approach to these companies. As if to underscore that possibility, DeepSeeks founder, Liang Wenfeng, was invited to a discussion with Premier Li Qiang on Jan. 20, the same day that the company released its latest and most powerful A.I. model, known as R1. Mr. Liangs attendance was all the more remarkable considering DeepSeek had not been considered one of Chinas so-called A.I. Tigers. That distinction is reserved for high-profile firms like Zhipu AI, a Beijing-based start-up that has received substantial state investment. Two men are side by side in an official-looking setting, seated at a panel with microphones in front of them. Liang Wenfeng, DeepSeeks founder, meeting with Premier Li Qiang last week, in an image from a Chinese state media broadcast.Credit...CCTV DeepSeek is no stranger to the partys urge to interfere; that may have inadvertently played a role in its eventual success. DeepSeek had originally trained its A.I. models to make bets on the Chinese stock market. But when regulators targeted such behavior, it pivoted in 2023 to advanced A.I. to conform with Chinas industrial policy. Then it stunned the world by rivaling the performance of its American competitors despite using far fewer of the advanced computer chips that are hard for China to obtain  a technological feat that until recently had not been available. At home, Chinese commentators have held up DeepSeeks achievement as evidence that U.S. restrictions on exports of A.I. chips to China are ultimately futile (even though the companys founder has said such limits are a major concern). Even the recent allegations by OpenAI that DeepSeek improperly harvested its data to build its models have not deterred its fans in China, who accuse the San Francisco company of spreading rumors. The U.S. technological sanctions on China have left China with no choice but to develop, said Sun Chenghao, a foreign relations expert at Tsinghua University in Beijing, echoing a popular sentiment in China. We can only rely on ourselves. A.I. holds a special place in Mr. Xis vision of Chinas rise, with its potential to help the country overcome many of its biggest challenges like its shrinking work force. China has used facial recognition and algorithms to supercharge its ability to surveil its people and snuff out dissent. The technology is also factoring into Chinas military modernization with autonomous weapons systems and even battlefield strategy. DeepSeeks development could also advance Chinas geopolitical goals. DeepSeek uses an open source model, meaning anyone can peer under its hood and use its technology, unlike leading American companies that use more expensive proprietary software. The low cost and open source nature of DeepSeeks model bolsters the Chinese governments narrative that China is the place developing countries can look to for A.I. solutions, Mr. Sheehan said. A variety of cameras mounted on poles in an outdoor area. Security cameras and high-rises in Xiamen, China, in 2023.Credit...Qilai Shen for The New York Times How big a player China becomes on the global stage in A.I. could ultimately depend on how the government decides to balance regulations with the freedom that companies and researchers need to do cutting-edge work that allows them to compete with the United States. Some analysts like Gregory C. Allen, a researcher at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and a former U.S. defense official, said there were most likely no restraints on A.I. development when it comes to Chinas military. The only thing holding them back is performance, said Mr. Allen, who in his former job held talks with members of the Peoples Liberation Army responsible for assessing the risks of A.I. The same does not hold true for regulating A.I. in the private sector. The landscape there is dictated by the competing priorities of Chinas regulatory agencies, each feeling their way around a technology that many in the world still do not fully understand. It is clear that the more widely used a technology is, the more the party will want to rein it in. In 2023, just months after ChatGPT set off an investment frenzy over artificial intelligence, China issued rules aimed at controlling what Chinese chatbots say to users, requiring them to reflect socialist core values and avoid information that undermines state power. In the case of DeepSeeks chatbot, this has led to awkward responses to seemingly benign questions like, Who is Xi Jinping? Researchers testing its capabilities have found that the bot gives answers that spread Chinese propaganda and even parrot disinformation campaigns. Some concerns are more existential in nature. A growing chorus of scholars have been sounding the alarm about the potentially catastrophic consequences of losing human control over A.I. Chief among those voices has been Andrew Yao, a giant in A.I. at Tsinghua University and a recipient of the Turing Award, the equivalent of the Nobel Prize for computing. His influence helped establish what China calls the Global AI Governance Initiative, which was introduced by Mr. Xi in 2023 and included a call to always keep A.I. under human control. Last year, the government also called for the enhancement of A.I. governance on the basis of human decision-making and supervision. Ultimately, A.I. in China may only advance as far as the government decides it can mitigate those risks, said Barath Harithas, an expert on A.I. policy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. Overregulation and the need to adhere to core socialist values could risk neutering A.I.s potential, Mr. Harithas said. OpenAI Says DeepSeek May Have Improperly Harvested Its Data The San Francisco start-up claims that its Chinese rival may have used data generated by OpenAI technologies to build new systems. OpenAI says it is reviewing evidence that the Chinese start-up DeepSeek broke its terms of service by harvesting large amounts of data from its A.I technologies. The San Francisco-based start-up, which is now valued at $157 billion, said that DeepSeek may have used data generated by OpenAI technologies to teach similar skills to its own systems. This process, called distillation, is common across the A.I. field. But OpenAIs terms of service say that the company does not allow anyone to use data generated by its systems to build technologies that compete in the same market. We know that groups in the P.R.C. are actively working to use methods, including whats known as distillation, to replicate advanced U.S. A.I. models, OpenAI spokeswoman Liz Bourgeois said in a statement emailed to The New York Times, referring to the Peoples Republic of China. We are aware of and reviewing indications that DeepSeek may have inappropriately distilled our models, and will share information as we know more, she said. We take aggressive, proactive countermeasures to protect our technology and will continue working closely with the U.S. government to protect the most capable models being built here. DeepSeek did not immediately respond to a request for comment. DeepSeek spooked Silicon Valley tech companies and sent the U.S. financial markets into a tailspin earlier this week after releasing A.I. technologies that matched the performance of anything else on the market. The prevailing wisdom had been that the most powerful systems could not be built without billions of dollars in specialized computer chips, but DeepSeek said it had created its technologies using far fewer resources. Like any other A.I. company, DeepSeek built its technologies using computer code and data corralled from across the internet. A.I. companies lean heavily on a practice called open sourcing, freely sharing the code that underpins their technologies  and reusing code shared by others. They see this is as way of accelerating technological development. They also need massive amounts of online data to train their A.I. systems. These systems learn their skills by pinpointing patterns in text, computer programs, images, sounds and videos. The leading systems learn their skills by analyzing just about all of the text on the internet. Distillation is often used to train new systems. If a company takes data from proprietary technology, the practice may be legally problematic. But it is often allowed by open source technologies. OpenAI is now facing more than a dozen lawsuits accusing it of illegally using copyrighted internet data to train its systems. This includes a lawsuit brought by The New York Times against OpenAI and its partner Microsoft. The suit contends that millions of articles published by The Times were used to train automated chatbots that now compete with the news outlet as a source of reliable information. Both OpenAI and Microsoft deny the claims. A Times report also showed that OpenAI has used speech recognition technology to transcribe the audio from YouTube videos, yielding new conversational text that would make an A.I. system smarter. Some OpenAI employees discussed how such a move might go against YouTubes rules, three people with knowledge of the conversations said. An OpenAI team, including the companys president, Greg Brockman, transcribed more than one million hours of YouTube videos, the people said. The texts were then fed into a system called GPT-4, which was widely considered one of the worlds most powerful A.I. models and was the basis of the latest version of the ChatGPT chatbot. Why DeepSeek could mark a turning point for Silicon Valley on AI Silicon Valley is coming to grips this week with the realization that creating an advanced artificial intelligence model may no longer be as specialized a task as was once believed. The wakeup call came in the form of DeepSeek, a year-old Chinese start-up whose free, open-source AI model, R1, is more or less on par with advanced models from American tech giants and it was built for a fraction of the cost, apparently with less advanced chips and it demands far less data center power to run. Until now, the widely accepted wisdom in the US tech world was that American tech giants could stay ahead by spending billions of dollars, amassing advanced chips and building out huge data centers (despite the environmental cost). Essentially, because theyre among the richest companies in the world, they believed they could throw more resources at the problem than anyone else and come out on top. A television broadcasts DeepSeek news at the Nasdaq MarketSite in New York, US, on Monday, January 27, 2025. Related article DeepSeek chaos suggests America First may not always win Now, all of that has been called into question. And tech giants are facing tough questions from Wall Street. The name of the AI game may no longer be winning with the most expensive, ever-more powerful models. The paradigm is shifting, said Zack Kass, an AI consultant and former OpenAI go-to-market lead. Its so hard to own a scientific breakthrough such as an AI model advancement, Kass said, and prevent competitors from catching up. Instead, tech companies may now find themselves competing to lower costs and build more helpful applications for consumers and corporate customers and also to suck up less power and natural resources in the process. Silicon Valley reacts At least one American tech leader has already promised to respond to DeepSeek by speeding up the release of more powerful models. OpenAI CEO Sam Altman called DeepSeeks R1 model impressive in an X post Monday, adding that we will pull up some releases of new models in response. OpenAI Chief Product Officer Kevin Weil also said the companys upcoming o3 model, set to launch in the coming weeks, would be another major step up. Its a super competitive industry, right? And this is showing that its competitive globally, not just within the US, Weil said on a call with reporters about OpenAIs new ChatGPT offering for government agencies, in response to a question from CNN. Were committed to moving really quickly here. We want to stay ahead. But analysts also expect the Big Tech companies to scale back their data center spending plans and potentially rethink how much theyre charging consumers. DeepSeek has proved its possible to provide the technology at a lesser cost, although some industry experts have raised eyebrows at the startups claims about spending just under $6 million to build its model. OpenAIs largest investor, Microsoft, is investigating whether DeepSeek trained its model off of stolen OpenAI data, Bloomberg reported. Even if the company achieved its efficiency revolution with some malfeasance, DeepSeeks achievements have lit a fire under Silicon Valleys AI industry. DeepSeek's large language model is basically a cheaper ChatGPT, made with a handful of old Nvidia chips. Related article DeepSeek just blew up the AI industrys narrative that it needs more money and power All those other frontier model labs OpenAI, Anthropic, Google are going to build far more efficient models based on what theyre learning from DeepSeek, said Gil Luria, head of technology research at investment firm D.A. Davidson. And youll be able to use those at a fraction of the price that you can now, because its going to be a fraction of the cost to run those models. To be sure, the industry was almost certainly going to eventually shift its focus to efficiency working to add AI capabilities using a set amount of computing power versus adding more servers to juice the technology. There are only so many computers you can build and only so much electricity available to service them. And an AI tool can only get so proficient at, say, writing emails or planning trips, before making it marginally more powerful is no longer worthwhile. But DeepSeek appears to have sped up that timeline. And in Silicon Valley, unwinding spending on data centers could be tricky. Just last week, OpenAI, Oracle and SoftBank visited the White House to announce the creation of a new company and a $500 million investment in US AI infrastructure; Microsoft CEO Sundar Pichai affirmed he was good for his companys planned $80 billion investment in AI development and infrastructure this year; and Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said his companys AI spending could reach as much as $65 billion this year. That crazy AI data center build-out that weve been talking about for the last couple of years? They dont need to do that anymore. They can build a lot less because they can provide a lot more services at a much lower price, Luria said. He added that investors will likely expect to hear about those plans in the American tech companies earnings calls over the next two weeks. Of course, if the tech giants cut data center costs for training AI models and therefore charge customers less their tools will get used more, putting more inference (or people asking questions) strain on the data centers, Bloomberg Intelligence analysts wrote Tuesday. So just how dramatic that pullback on data center spending might be remains to be seen. DeepSeeks upside Some tech leaders say theyre looking at DeepSeek as validation rather than a threat. Proponents of open-source AI where the models underlying architecture is made publicly available, rather than charged for say the Chinese model is proof that American companies should be sharing their innovations rather than gatekeeping them. That way, the whole US field could advance more quickly and remain the technology standard around the world. The United States already has the best closed models in the world. To remain competitive, we must also support the development of a vibrant open-source ecosystem, former Google CEO Eric Schmidt wrote in a Washington Post op-ed Tuesday. Meta, which has pushed open-source AI with its Llama model, also said such models are driving a significant shift in the industry, and thats going to bring the benefits of AI to everyone faster. And even if DeepSeek forces a short-term rethinking of the business model Silicon Valley had envisioned for AI, people who believe the technology will change the world should be glad for the advancement, Kass said. We are freaked out fairly, I suppose, because we thought we had global AI supremacy, when, in fact, we should be celebrating, Kass said. Because this is one more piece of evidence that the AI revolution is going to democratize technology and its going to be fairly distributed. DeepSeek just blew up the AI industrys narrative that it needs more money and power The story of AI in the 2020s has gone something like this: Sam Altman: Look, a toy that can write your book report. VCs: This will fix everything! Doomers: This will ruin everything. Tech: We need money! Everyone else: Could we maybe not destroy the environment over this? Tech: Lets restart Three Mile Island. Tech: We need money! Wall Street: Wheres our return? Tech: (Chants) More power! More power! More power! And finally, in the year 2025, here comes DeepSeek to blow up the industrys whole narrative about AIs bottomless appetite for power, and potentially break the spell that had kept Wall Street funneling money to anyone with the words harnessing artificial intelligence in their pitch deck. ICYMI: DeepSeek dropped a bomb known as R1 thats got all of Silicon Valley and much of Wall Street in a tizzy. The Chinese companys large language model is basically a cheaper, more efficient ChatGPT, built on a fraction of OpenAIs budget and using far fewer chips than any other leading chatbot. That is a massive earthquake in the AI sector, Gil Luria, head of tech research at investment group D.A. Davidson, told me. Everybody is looking at it and saying, We didnt think this is possible. And since it is possible, we have to rethink everything that we have been planning. This photo illustration shows the DeepSeek app on a mobile phone in Beijing Related article What is DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup that shook the tech world? Suddenly, all that money and computing power that the Sam Altmans, Mark Zuckerbergs and Elon Musks have been saying are crucial to their AI projects and thus Americas continued leadership in the industry may end up being wildly overblown. DeepSeek, which on Monday climbed to No. 1 on the Apple app store, claims to have built its base model for less than $6 million (versus the more than $100 million Altman has said it cost to build GPT-4). It also claims to have used just 2,000 Nvidia chips that it obtained before US export restrictions were put in place. (OpenAI says it used 25,000 of the more powerful Nvidia H100 chips to build GPT-4.) Its awkward timing for the Trump administration, which last week announced a half-trillion-dollar private-sector investment to build more data centers and keep the United States ahead of China in the AI race. (Oops!) And its incredibly bad news for Nvidia, the American chip maker powering the AI gold rush. Nvidia shares sank 17% Monday, shedding $600 billion in market cap in a single session the biggest one-day loss for a single stock in history. Alphabet, Microsoft, Oracle, TSMC and plenty of others sank, and because tech stocks are so dominant, that dragged the broader stock market down, too. The tech-heavy Nasdaq plunged by 3% and the broader S&P 500 fell 1.5%. (The Dow, buoyed by health care and consumer companies, ended the day up less than 1%.) AI is over, long live AI Of course, one bad day on Wall Street does not an apocalypse make. (Thats for later, when one of these AI labs creates superintelligent murder bots. Kidding! Kind of.) But DeepSeek is forcing investors to take a beat and question tech companies assumptions. By its own reasoning, the AI industry needed to keep increasing compute (or computational power), which meant buying tens of thousands of Nvidias state-of-the-art chips and building giant data centers. DeepSeek makes it very clear that that the current trajectory of scaling up of data centers is highly unlikely to be economic to Nvidias customers, Luria said. The AI industry, and OpenAI in particular, has been going down two paths at once. Theres the business of designing AI models with better algorithms and sounder reasoning the kind of stuff that requires finesse, as opposed to brute force, Luria says. And then theres the Stargate path of giant energy investments. The first task is still valid and important, while the second path looks ridiculous, Luria said. DeepSeek makes it clear that that scale and that spend would be, at the very least, wasteful. In other words, AI isnt dead. But the landscape is shifting faster than anyone, perhaps most of all Nvidia, expected. Picks and shovels Nvidia has become the ultimate picks and shovels play on Wall Street, transforming it into a $3 trillion company in the span of a couple of years. Up until now, the demand for Nvidia chips appeared boundless tech companies were going to keep gobbling them up faster than Nvidia could produce them. But if DeepSeek really did manage to build a ChatGPT competitor using a handful of old processors, then maybe Nvidias tech customers soon wont need as many as theyd thought. Many on Wall Street seemed to think so Monday as the stock went into a tailspin. (For its part, Nvidia seemed to shrug at the selloff in a statement to Bloomberg, calling DeepSeeks model an excellent AI advancement that illustrates how new models can be created.) Its also good to keep in mind that Wall Street is prone to tantrums, which is how some tech investors chalked up Mondays selloff. At the end of the day, there is only one chip company in the world launching autonomous, robotics, and broader AI use cases, and that is Nvidia, Wedbush analysts wrote in a letter to clients. Launching a competitive LLM model for consumer use cases is one thing launching broader AI infrastructure is a whole other ballgame, and nothing with DeepSeek makes us believe anything different. DeepSeek is giving the world a window into Chinese censorship and information control Previously little-known Chinese startup DeepSeek has dominated headlines and app charts in recent days thanks to its new AI chatbot, which sparked a global tech sell-off that wiped billions off Silicon Valleys biggest companies and shattered assumptions of Americas dominance of the tech race. But those signing up for the chatbot and its open-source technology are being confronted with the Chinese Communist Partys brand of censorship and information control. Ask DeepSeeks newest AI model, unveiled last week, to do things like explain who is winning the AI race, summarize the latest executive orders from the White House or tell a joke and a user will get similar answers to the ones spewed out by American-made rivals OpenAIs GPT-4, Metas Llama or Googles Gemini. Yet when questions veer into territory that would be restricted or heavily moderated on Chinas domestic internet, the responses reveal aspects of the countrys tight information controls. Using the internet in the worlds second most populous country is to cross whats often dubbed the Great Firewall and enter a completely separate internet eco-system policed by armies of censors, where most major Western social media and search platforms are blocked. The country routinely ranks among the most restrictive for internet and speech freedoms in reports from global watchdogs. The international popularity of Chinese apps like TikTok and RedNote have already raised national security concerns among Western governments as well as questions about the potential impact to free speech and Beijings ability to shape global narratives and public opinion. Now, the introduction of DeepSeeks AI assistant which is free and rocketed to the top of app charts in recent days raises the urgency of those questions, observers say, and spotlights the online ecosystem from which they have emerged. Not sure how to approach this type of question One example of a question DeepSeeks new bot, using its R1 model, will answer differently than a Western rival? The Tiananmen Square massacre on June 4, 1989, when the Chinese government brutally cracked down on student protesters in Beijing and across the country, killing hundreds if not thousands of students in the capital, according to estimates from rights groups. Chinese authorities have so thoroughly suppressed discussion of the massacre in the decades since that many people in China grow up never having heard about it. A search for what happened on June 4, 1989 in Beijing on major Chinese online search platform Baidu turns up articles noting that June 4 is the 155th day in the Gregorian calendar or a link to a state media article noting authorities that year quelled counter-revolutionary riots with no mention of Tiananmen. When the same query is put to DeepSeeks newest AI assistant, it begins to give an answer detailing some of the events, including a military crackdown, before erasing it and replying that its not sure how to approach this type of question yet. Lets chat about math, coding and logic problems instead, it says. When asked the same question in Chinese, the app is faster immediately apologizing for not knowing how to answer. Its a similar patten when asking the R1 bot DeepSeeks newest model what happened in Hong Kong in 2019, when the city was rocked by pro-democracy protests. First it gives a detailed overview of events with a conclusion that at least during one test noted as Western observers have that Beijings subsequent imposition of a National Security Law on the city led to a significant erosion of civil liberties. But quickly after or amid its response, the bot erases its own answer and suggests talking about something else. This screengrab shows Chinese hedge fund manager Liang Wenfeng, who founded DeepSeek, in a symposium with Chinese Premier Li Qiang in Beijing on January 20, 2025. Related article China celebrates DeepSeeks breakout AI success as tech race heats up DeepSeeks V3 bot, released late last year weeks prior to R1, returns different answers, including ones that appear to rely more heavily on Chinas official stance. When asked about its sources, DeepSeeks R1 bot said it used a diverse dataset of publicly available texts, including both Chinese state media and international sources. Critical thinking and cross-referencing remain key when navigating politically charged subjects, it said. CNN has approached the company for comment. How Chinas DeepSeek app compares to ChatGPT 02:48 Controlling the narrative? Observers say that these differences have significant implications for free speech and the shaping of global public opinion. That spotlights another dimension of the battle for tech dominance: who gets to control the narrative on major global issues, and history itself. An audit by US-based information reliability analytics firm NewsGuard released Wednesday said DeepSeeks older V3 chatbot model failed to provide accurate information about news and information topics 83% of the time, ranking it tied for 10th out of 11 in comparison to its leading Western competitors. Its not clear how the newer R1 stacks up, however. DeepSeek becoming a global AI leader could have catastrophic consequences, said China analyst Isaac Stone Fish. It would be incredibly dangerous for free speech and free thought globally, because it hives off the ability to think openly, creatively and, in many cases, correctly about one of the most important entities in the world, which is China, said Fish, who is the founder of business intelligence firm Strategy Risks. Thats because the app, when asked about the country or its leaders, present China like the utopian Communist state that has never existed and will never exist, he added. In mainland China, the ruling Chinese Communist Party has ultimate authority over what information and images can and cannot be shown part of their iron-fisted efforts to maintain control over society and suppress all forms of dissent. And tech companies like DeepSeek have no choice but to follow the rules. Chinese artificial intelligence startup DeepSeek is forcing Silicon Valley to reconsider its plans for developing AI technology. Related article Why DeepSeek could mark a turning point for Silicon Valley on AI Because the technology was developed in China, its model is going to be collecting more China-centric or pro-China data than a Western firm, a reality which will likely impact the platform, according to Aaron Snoswell, a senior research fellow in AI accountability at the Queensland University of Technology Generative AI Lab. The company itself, like all AI firms, will also set various rules to trigger set responses when words or topics that the platform doesnt want to discuss arise, Snoswell said, pointing to examples like Tiananmen Square. In addition, AI companies often use workers to help train the model in what kinds of topics may be taboo or okay to discuss and where certain boundaries are, a process called reinforcement learning from human feedback that DeepSeek said in a research paper it used. That means someone in DeepSeek wrote a policy document that says, here are the topics that are okay and here are the topics that are not okay. They gave that to their workers and then that behavior would have been embedded into the model, he said. US AI chatbots also generally have parameters for example ChatGPT wont tell a user how to make a bomb or fabricate a 3D gun, and they typically use mechanisms like reinforcement learning to create guardrails against hate speech, for example. Thats how every other company makes these models behave better, Snoswell said. But its just that in this case, chances are that a Chinese company embedded (Chinas official) values into their policy. Security concerns There have also been questions raised about potential security risks linked to DeepSeeks platform, which the White House on Tuesday said it was investigating for national security implications. Concerns about American data being in the hands of Chinese firms is already a hot button issue in Washington, fueling the controversy over social media app TikTok. The apps Chinese parent company ByteDance is being required by law to divest TikToks American business, though the enforcement of this was paused by Trump. Unlike TikTok, which says as of July 2022 it stores all American data in the US, DeepSeek says in its privacy policy that personal information it collects is stored in secure servers located in the Peoples Republic of China. A comparison of privacy policies between DeepSeek and some of its US competitors also show concerning differences, according to Snoswell. Each DeepSeek, OpenAI and Meta say they collect peoples data such as from their account information, activities on the platforms and the devices theyre using. But DeepSeek adds that it also collects keystroke patterns or rhythms, which can be as uniquely identifying as a fingerprint or facial recognition and used a biometric. Ive never seen another software platform that says they collect that unless its designed for (those purposes), Snoswell said. He also noted what appeared to be vaguely defined allowances for sharing of user data to entities within DeepSeeks corporate group. Its way, way more permissive than anything youd see from a Western software company, he said. AI giants Baidu, OpenAI offer their chatbots for free in response to DeepSeeks advance Chinese internet search giant Baidu will make its advanced AI chatbot services free, as competition heats up among global developers following the surging popularity of startup DeepSeeks models. Ernie Bot, the Beijing-based companys AI chatbot with premium features like AI painting, will be available to both mobile and desktop users at no cost starting from April 1, it posted on WeChat on Thursday. Just hours before Baidus announcement, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman announced the roadmap of its newest AI model, GPT-5, on X. He said ChatGPT users will have unlimited access to GPT-5 free of charge, though paid subscribers will be able to access a higher level of intelligence. On Friday, Baidu said in another post that it plans to launch the next generation of its AI model by the end of June. And for the first time, it would make that edition of the model open source, like all of DeepSeeks models. It added that Ernies Deep Search function, featuring enhanced reasoning capabilities and expert-level responses, will also launch for free in April. The successive announcements reflect the squeeze that Baidu and other firms face in the intensifying AI race in China, particularly following DeepSeeks recent release. The Chinese startups latest R1 AI model stunned the world by delivering comparable performance to US-based industry behemoths at significantly lower cost. Baidus Hong Kong-listed stock jumped as much as 12% on Thursday and last traded around 95 Hong Kong dollars ($12.20) per share on Friday. A component of the Hang Seng China Enterprises Index, it has helped power the index up 20% since January. An Alibaba Group sign is seen at the World Artificial Intelligence Conference in Shanghai, China, on July 6, 2023. Related article Apple picks Alibaba to launch AI features in China ChatGPTs debut in late 2022 enraptured the globe overnight and sent Chinese tech giants scrambling for a homegrown alternative. Baidu was one of the leading contenders in Chinas AI scene, releasing its answer to ChatGPT within four months and was ahead of other established tech heavy weights like Tencent and Alibaba. But Baidu has trailed behind competitors like ByteDances Doubao in terms of popularity and the number of active users. Alibaba says Apple had chosen to work with it to roll out its AI functions in China after considering multiple Chinese AI firms, including Baidu. Lots of contenders Chinas OG tech giants have lost the AI limelight in recent months to emerging startups like DeepSeek and Beijing-based Moonshot AI, which have released models that punch above their weight. Moonshot AI first launched its ChatGPT equivalent, Kimi, late last year. It was the third-most visited AI Chatbot in China after DeepSeek and Doubao in January, according to aircpb.com, an AI product tracker. Other promising Chinese AI companies include Zhipu AI, a startup originating from Beijings prestigious Tsinghua University. Based in the Chinese capital, Zhipu is backed by Tencent and Alibaba and has strong government ties. The US Commerce Department last month added Zhipu to its Entity List, accusing the company of supporting the Chinese military, which it has denied. Most major AI large language models  including Ernie Bot, OpenAIs ChatGPT and American startup Anthropics Claude  have offered their basic chatbot services for free. ChatGPT debuted without charging before it began to offer premium features on subscription. In 2023, Baidu launched paid premium functions for its AI service, including its text to image generator, charging users from up to 59.9 yuan ($8.2) a month. Ernie Bot has amassed 430 million users as of November 2024, according to Baidu. What is DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup that shook the tech world? A surprisingly efficient and powerful Chinese AI model has taken the technology industry by storm. Its called DeepSeek R1, and its rattling nerves on Wall Street. The new AI model was developed by DeepSeek, a startup that was born just a year ago and has somehow managed a breakthrough that famed tech investor Marc Andreessen has called AIs Sputnik moment: R1 can nearly match the capabilities of its far more famous rivals, including OpenAIs GPT-4, Metas Llama and Googles Gemini  but at a fraction of the cost. The company said it had spent just $5.6 million powering its base AI model, compared with the hundreds of millions, if not billions of dollars US companies spend on their AI technologies. Thats even more shocking when considering that the United States has worked for years to restrict the supply of high-power AI chips to China, citing national security concerns. That means DeepSeek was supposedly able to achieve its low-cost model on relatively under-powered AI chips. What is DeepSeek? The company, founded in late 2023 by Chinese hedge fund manager Liang Wenfeng, is one of scores of startups that have popped up in recent years seeking big investment to ride the massive AI wave that has taken the tech industry to new heights. Liang has become the Sam Altman of China  an evangelist for AI technology and investment in new research. His hedge fund, High-Flyer, focuses on AI development. Like other AI startups, including Anthropic and Perplexity, DeepSeek released various competitive AI models over the past year that have captured some industry attention. Its V3 model raised some awareness about the company, although its content restrictions around sensitive topics about the Chinese government and its leadership sparked doubts about its viability as an industry competitor, the Wall Street Journal reported. But R1, which came out of nowhere when it was revealed late last year, launched last week and gained significant attention this week when the company revealed to the Journal its shockingly low cost of operation. And it is open-source, which means other companies can test and build upon the model to improve it. The DeepSeek app has surged on the app store charts, surpassing ChatGPT Monday, and it has been downloaded nearly 2 million times. Why is DeepSeek such a big deal? AI is a power-hungry and cost-intensive technology  so much so that Americas most powerful tech leaders are buying up nuclear power companies to provide the necessary electricity for their AI models. Meta last week said it would spend upward of $65 billion this year on AI development. Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, last year said the AI industry would need trillions of dollars in investment to support the development of high-in-demand chips needed to power the electricity-hungry data centers that run the sectors complex models. So the notion that similar capabilities as Americas most powerful AI models can be achieved for such a small fraction of the cost  and on less capable chips  represents a sea change in the industrys understanding of how much investment is needed in AI. The technology has many skeptics and opponents, but its advocates promise a bright future: AI will advance the global economy into a new era, they argue, making work more efficient and opening up new capabilities across multiple industries that will pave the way for new research and developments. Andreessen, a Trump supporter and co-founder of Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, called DeepSeek one of the most amazing and impressive breakthroughs Ive ever seen, in a post on X. If that potentially world-changing power can be achieved at a significantly reduced cost, it opens up new possibilities  and threats  to the planet. What does this mean for America? The United States thought it could sanction its way to dominance in a key technology it believes will help bolster its national security. Just a week before leaving office, former President Joe Biden doubled down on export restrictions on AI computer chips to prevent rivals like China from accessing the advanced technology. But DeepSeek has called into question that notion, and threatened the aura of invincibility surrounding Americas technology industry. America may have bought itself time with restrictions on chip exports, but its AI lead just shrank dramatically despite those actions. DeepSeek may show that turning off access to a key technology doesnt necessarily mean the United States will win. Thats an important message to President Donald Trump as he pursues his isolationist America First policy. Wall Street was alarmed by the development. US stocks were set for a steep selloff Monday morning. Nvidia (NVDA), the leading supplier of AI chips, whose stock more than doubled in each of the past two years, fell 12% in premarket trading. Meta (META) and Alphabet (GOOGL), Googles parent company, were also down sharply, as were Marvell, Broadcom, Palantir, Oracle and many other tech giants. Are we really sure this is a big deal? The industry is taking the company at its word that the cost was so low. No one is really disputing it, but the market freak-out hinges on the truthfulness of a single and relatively unknown company. The company notably didnt say how much it cost to train its model, leaving out potentially expensive research and development costs. (Still, it probably didnt spend billions of dollars.) Its also far too early to count out American tech innovation and leadership. One achievement, albeit a gobsmacking one, may not be enough to counter years of progress in American AI leadership. And a massive customer shift to a Chinese startup is unlikely. The DeepSeek model rollout is leading investors to question the lead that US companies have and how much is being spent and whether that spending will lead to profits (or overspending), said Keith Lerner, analyst at Truist. Ultimately, our view, is the required spend for data and such in AI will be significant, and US companies remain leaders. Although the cost-saving achievement may be significant, the R1 model is a ChatGPT competitor  a consumer-focused large-language model. It hasnt yet proven it can handle some of the massively ambitious AI capabilities for industries that  for now  still require tremendous infrastructure investments. Thanks to its rich talent and capital base, the US remains the most promising home turf from which we expect to see the emergence of the first self-improving AI, said Giuseppe Sette, president of AI market research firm Reflexivity. The real reason behind the DeepSeek hype, according to AI experts DeepSeek turned the tech world on its head last month and for good reason, according to artificial intelligence experts, who say were likely only seeing the beginning of the Chinese tech startups influence on the AI field. DeepSeek grabbed headlines in late January with its R1 AI model, which the company says can roughly match the performance of Open AIs o1 model at a fraction of the cost. Tech stocks tumbled as DeepSeek briefly unseated ChatGPT to become the top app in Apples App Store. The achievement pushed US tech behemoths to question Americas standing in the AI race against China and the billions of dollars behind those efforts. While Vice President JD Vance didnt mention DeepSeek or China by name in his remarks at the Artificial Intelligence Action Summit in Paris on Tuesday, he certainly emphasized how big of a priority it is for the United States to lead the sector. The United States of America is the leader in AI, and our administration plans to keep it that way, he said, although he added that America wants to partner with other countries. But its not just DeepSeeks efficiency and power. The way DeepSeek R1 can reason and think through answers to provide quality results, along with the companys decision to make key parts of its technology publicly available, will also push the field forward, experts say. While AI has long been used in tech products, its reached a flashpoint over the last two years thanks to the rise of ChatGPT and other generative AI services that have reshaped the way people work, communicate and find information. Its made Wall Street darlings out of companies like chipmaker Nvidia and upended the trajectory of Silicon Valley giants. So any development that can help build more capable and efficient models is sure to be closely watched. This is definitely not hype, said Oren Etzioni, former CEO of the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. But also, this is a very fast-moving world. AIs TikTok moment Tech leaders have been quick to respond to DeepSeeks rise. Google DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis called the hype around DeepSeek exaggerated, but also said its model as probably the best work Ive seen come out of China, according to CNBC. Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said on the companys quarterly earnings call in January that DeepSeek has some real innovations, while Apple CEO Tim Cook said on the iPhone makers earnings call that innovation that drives efficiency is a good thing. But the attention hasnt all been positive. Semiconductor researcher SemiAnalysis cast doubt over DeepSeeks claims that it only cost $5.6 million to train. OpenAI told The Financial Times it found evidence that DeepSeek used the US companys models to train its own competitor. We are aware of and reviewing indications that DeepSeek may have inappropriately distilled our models, and will share information as we know more, an OpenAI spokesperson said in a comment to CNN. DeepSeek could not immediately be reached for comment. And a pair of US lawmakers has already called for the app to be banned from government devices after security researchers highlighted its potential links to the Chinese government, as the Associated Press and ABC News reported. Similar concerns have been raised about the popular social media app TikTok, which must be sold to an American owner or risk being banned in the US. DeepSeek is the TikTok of (large language models), Etzioni said. DeepSeeks deep impression on the tech world Tech giants are already thinking about how DeepSeeks technology can influence their products and services. What DeepSeek gave us was essentially the recipe in the form of a tech report, but they didnt give us the extra missing parts, said Lewis Tunstall, a senior research scientist at Hugging Face, an AI platform that offers tools for developers. Tunstall is leading an effort at Hugging Face to fully open source DeepSeeks R1 model; while DeepSeek provided a research paper and the models parameters, it didnt reveal the code or training data. Nadella said on Microsofts earnings call that Windows Copilot+ PCs, or PCs built to a certain spec to support AI models, will be able to run AI models distilled from DeepSeek R1 locally. Mobile chipmaker Qualcomm said on Tuesday that models distilled from DeepSeek R1 were running on smartphones and PCs powered by its chips within a week. AI researchers, academics and developers are still exploring what DeepSeek means for the advancement of AI. DeepSeeks model isnt the only open-source one, nor is it the first to be able to reason over answers before responding; OpenAIs o1 model from last year can do that, too. What makes DeepSeek significant is the way it can reason and learn from other models, along with the fact that the AI community can see whats happening behind the scenes. Those who use the R1 model in DeepSeeks app can also see its thought process as it answers questions. You can see the wheels turning inside the machine, Durga Malladi, senior vice president and general manager for technology planning and edge solutions at Qualcomm, said to CNN. Tunstall thinks we may see a wave of new models that can reason like DeepSeek in the not-too-distant future. That could be critical as tech giants race to build AI agents, which Silicon Valley generally believes are the next evolution of the chatbot and how consumers will interact with devices although that shift hasnt quite happened yet. Grok 3, the next iteration of the chatbot on the social media platform X, will have very powerful reasoning capabilities, its owner, Elon Musk, said on Thursday in a video appearance during the World Governments Summit. For now, the AI community will keep tinkering with what DeepSeek has to offer. That is, until the next breakthrough comes along. I certainly predict that in the next 12 months, itll be supplanted by something else, said Etzioni. But its a very real advance. DeepSeek chaos suggests America First may not always win The stunning rise of DeepSeek is sending shockwaves through the artificial intelligence world, threatening Americas dominance that seemed set in stone just a week ago. The fact that a little-known Chinese startup has built a model that can compete with leading US AI systems is challenging the conventional wisdom that it takes gobs of money and unlimited access to cutting-edge computer chips to train AI technology. It shouldnt really be possible for a Chinese AI startup to go toe-to-toe with OpenAIs GPT-4o and Googles Gemini. Now, President Donald Trump has to decide how to respond. The United States has imposed tough restrictions that are designed to prevent Chinese firms from buying or building their own cutting-edge computer chips required to train AI models. These chips are at the heart of the AI arms race and the goal of the export curbs is to prevent China from keeping up. Some have argued that DeepSeeks success it claims to have trained its new AI model R1 at a fraction of the cost and on far fewer high-end chips than leading AI models shows the Biden and first Trump administrations export curbs have backfired: These tough restrictions may have backed Beijing into a corner, forcing Chinese firms to come up with ways to innovate around the export curbs or build their own chips. Rather than impeding China, these AI export controls may be accelerating Chinas AI capacity by pushing them to innovate, John Villasenor, a professor of engineering and law at UCLA, told CNN in a phone interview. The export controls, arguably, are counterproductive. That would be a blow to the tough crackdowns under both Trump and former President Joe Biden and the ones envisioned during this new Trump administration. We accidentally upped their technical game, AI researcher Gary Marcus wrote in a Substack post. It is clear that the game has changed. That notion that punishing restrictions may have had the opposite effect as the United States intended is raising tough questions about the very foundation of the AI boom, the tech arms race between the United States and China and how the Trump administration should respond. The AI house of cards theory Trump may be unswayed. I think Trump doubles down, said Ed Mills, Washington policy analyst at Raymond James, noting that Trump has surrounded himself with China hawks, such as Secretary of State Marco Rubio. His advisers around him point to more restrictions, not less. If Trump adds even more pressure on China over AI, proponents of a more hawkish strategy believe Chinas house of AI cards may crumble. Skeptics say its not clear how much of a gamechanger DeepSeek is. They argue its success could have been made possible either stockpiling high-end chips before restrictions were imposed or by buying the semiconductors on the black market. It is either a Sputnik Moment or a Potemkin Moment, Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, senior associate dean for leadership studies at the Yale School of Management, told CNN in an email. It is either truly disruptive or deceptive, relying on hoarded Nvidia chips and others before the export sanction. Sonnenfeld added that if it is a Sputnik-style disruption, it is a blow to pure reliance on competitive private markets without government partnership and national industrial policies. Scale AI CEO Alexandr Wang told CNBC that he understands DeepSeek has 50,000 leading-edge chips that they cant talk about, obviously, because it is against the export controls that the United States has put in place. Art Hogan, chief market strategist at B. Riley Wealth Management, urged investors to take DeepSeeks claims with a grain of salt because there is no concrete proof to back them up. China is claiming it has come up with the silver bullet, but it could be like the guy in high school who says he has a girlfriend, but shes just at a different school, Hogan said in a phone interview, noting that there has long been skepticism among Western economists about the veracity of Chinas economic statistics. If DeepSeek did have access to leading edge chips, that supports the argument that the export controls should be toughened. Mills notes that there is a very active black market for high-end chips and enforcement of export controls has been uneven. This has been a game of whack-a-mole, Mills said. There are still glaring loopholes that need to be closed. For example, Mills pointed to the need for more robust enforcement and further restrictions on the flow of leading-edge computer chips. Jake Sullivan, the US National Security Adviser under Biden, has acknowledged that the export controls are a work in progress. This is an iterative process. We learn, they learn. We learn, they learn, Sullivan said in May during a fireside chat. Sullivan also noted that China has tried to overwhelm export controls by projecting an air of inevitability to its AI ambitions. The PRC has embarked on a massive and relentless information campaign to basically say, This is futile. Resistance is futile. We will break these controls, Sullivan said. The stakes are massive. Many in Washington were well aware that the United States is in an AI arms race. But that race may be a bit closer, and perhaps significantly cheaper, than previously known. A pair of US lawmakers are seeking to ban government workers from using Chinese startup DeepSeeks artificial intelligence chatbot on official devices. Reps. Darin LaHood, a Republican from Illinois, and Josh Gottheimer, a New Jersey Democrat, are set to propose legislation on Friday that would ban the use of DeepSeek on government devices over national security concerns. DeepSeek is just the latest target in a larger battle for tech supremacy between the United States and China. The attempted crackdown comes weeks after DeepSeek shocked Silicon Valley and Wall Street by releasing an advanced AI model, called R1, with the same capabilities as top American models, despite being cheaper to train and less power-hungry. The model from a year-old Chinese startup subject to US export restrictions on the most powerful AI chips has fueled concerns that the United States could fall behind China in AI. Chinese artificial intelligence startup DeepSeek is forcing Silicon Valley to reconsider its plans for developing AI technology. If passed, the proposed bill would give 60 days for government agencies to develop standards and guidelines for removing DeepSeek as well as any other app developed by its parent company, High Flyer from official devices. The proposal follows similar moves by Australia, Italy and Taiwan. DeepSeek did not respond to a request for comment. The language in the proposed bill also echoes the legislation that has sought to restrict access to TikTok in the United States over worries that its China-based owner, ByteDance, could be forced to share sensitive US user data with the Chinese government. Federal and state government agencies began banning the use of TikTok on official devices starting in 2022. And ByteDance now has fewer than 60 days to sell the app before TikTok is banned in the United States, because of a law that was passed with bipartisan support last year and extended by President Donald Trump in January. The Chinese Communist Party has made it abundantly clear that it will exploit any tool at its disposal to undermine our national security, spew harmful disinformation, and collect data on Americans, Gottheimer said in a statement. We simply cant risk the CCP infiltrating the devices of our government officials and jeopardizing our national security Weve seen Chinas playbook before with TikTok, and we cannot allow it to happen again. Many AI companies use the inputs from users conversations with chatbots to train and improve their models, stoking privacy concerns. But security experts have already cautioned that DeepSeek could pose a bigger risk because of its Chinese owner. Users need to be aware that any data shared with the platform could be subject to government access under Chinas cybersecurity laws, which mandate that companies provide access to data upon request by authorities, NordVPN cybersecurity expert Adrianus Warmenhoven said in emailed commentary. China celebrates DeepSeeks breakout AI success as tech race heats up People across China are hailing the success of homegrown tech startup DeepSeek and its founder, after the companys newest artificial intelligence model sent shock waves through Silicon Valley and Wall Street. DeepSeek overturns the US stocks overnight one trending hashtag with tens of millions of views proclaimed on Chinese social media platform Weibo. DeepSeek makes Meta panic, said another, in reference to the US tech giant thats invested heavily in developing its own AI models. More than a dozen hashtags related to the cutting-edge technology were trending on Weibo early this week as DeepSeek surged to the top of international app store charts, surpassing American company OpenAIs ChatGPT on Monday. DeepSeek founder Liang Wenfeng was also hailed as a tech visionary who could help China usher in a culture of innovation to rival that of Silicon Valley. The engineer-turned-entrepreneur, who rarely gives interviews, is known for hiring only domestic talent and keeping his AI models open source, allowing other companies or users to test and build upon the model. Liang, a co-founder of AI-oriented hedge fund High-Flyer Quant, founded DeepSeek in 2023. The startups newest model DeepSeek R1, unveiled on January 20, can nearly match the capabilities of its far more famous American rivals, including OpenAIs GPT-4, Metas Llama and Googles Gemini. However, it cost less than $6 million to build, the company claims a fraction of the investment from those other firms. Famed tech investor Marc Andreessen hailed the model as a Sputnik moment and US President Donald Trump on Monday called the breakthrough a wake-up call for America in its rivalry with China. Technological dominance, especially in AI, has become a key battleground between the two powers, with the US in recent years limiting Chinese firms access to chips that could power rapid AI development. Analysts say that more information is needed to verify DeepSeeks claims about its products pricetag and point out that the app operates within the stringent restrictions on speech and information imposed by the Chinese government. That means its AI assistants answers to questions on the Tiananmen Square massacre or Hong Kongs pro-democracy protests will mirror Beijings line or a response will be declined altogether. But for many in China, the success of the technology and Liangs vision and ethos for DeepSeek mark a significant step forward for the country in a competitive international arena. No matter how powerful the old guard is, they may be overturned overnight, read one triumphant comment on Weibo with over a thousand likes. (Liangs) achievements can be called a national destiny, another read. CNN has reached out to Liang, DeepSeek and High-Flyer Quant for comment. Changing the rules of the game Born in the 1980s as the son of a primary school teacher, Liang grew up in a small city in Chinas southern province of Guangdong. He went on to study information and electronic engineering at Zhejiang University, a prestigious school in Chinas eastern tech hub Hangzhou, according to Chinese state media. Early business associates interviewed by state-linked financial outlet Yicai in recent days remembered the future DeepSeek founder as a bit nerdy and recalled a terrible haircut he sported in the past. Liang talked about his idea of training large AI models and changing the rules of the game, but no one took him seriously, the outlet reported, without naming the early associates. Such feats were typically only deemed possible for Chinas tech giants like ByteDance or Alibaba, it said. Liang co-founded his AI-oriented hedge fund High-Flyer Quant in 2015, less than decade after he finished his undergraduate studies, according to state media reports. The fund incorporates AI machine learning models into its operations, according to the companys website. Traders and financial professionals work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) during the first session of the new year on January 2, 2025, in New York City. Related article A shocking Chinese AI advancement called DeepSeek is sending US stocks plunging At the same time, the firm was amassing computing power into a basketball courtsized AI supercomputer, becoming among the top companies in China in terms of processing capabilities and the only one that was not a major tech giant, according to state-linked outlet The Paper. In 2023, Liang founded DeepSeek, with a focus on advancing the field of general artificial intelligence and, apparently, revamping Chinas culture around innovation. We often say theres a one or two-year gap between China and the US, but the real gap is between originality and imitation. If this doesnt change, China will always be a follower, Liang said in a rare media interview with the finance and tech-focused Chinese media outlet 36Kr last July. The rise of DeepSeek roughly coincides with the wind-down of a heavy-handed state crackdown on the countrys tech giants by authorities seeking to re-assert control over a cohort of innovative private firms that had grown too powerful in the governments eyes. But Beijing has also placed tremendous emphasis on cultivating technological prowess, with Chinese leaders vowing over the past year to boost self-reliance and strength in technology especially in the face of mounting tech competition with the United States. Liang appeared to reference difficulties posed by US tech export controls saying in the 36Kr interview last year that his companys challenges have not been about money, but the embargo on high-end chips. But he also expressed optimism about Chinas ability to compete in the future. When society allows hardcore innovators to succeed, collective thinking will change. We just need more concrete examples and processes, Liang told the outlet. We dont do mediocre The company, which has teams in Beijing and Hangzhou, has remained small, with just under 140 researchers and engineers, according to state media a far cry from the large firms both in China and the US that have led the creation of AI models. DeepSeeks employees have been recruited domestically, Liang said in the same interview last year, describing his team as fresh graduates and doctorate students from top Chinese universities. The top 50 talents may not be in China, but maybe we can create such people ourselves, he told 36Kr, noting that the work is divided naturally by who has what strengths. Innovation first requires confidence. This confidence is usually more obvious in young people, he added. This photo illustration shows the DeepSeek app on a mobile phone in Beijing Related article What is DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup that shook the tech world? Zihan Wang, a former DeepSeek employee now studying in the US, told MIT Technology Review in an interview published this month that the company offered a luxury that few fresh graduates would get at any company - access to abundant computing resources and the freedom to experiment. The whole team shared a collaborative culture around research, Wang said. Active recruitment ads on the DeepSeek website and major job seeking sites show the company hiring deep learning researchers, engineers, and user interface designers. Among them, the highest paid engineers positions are listed with a monthly salary range of up to 90,000 yuan ($12,400). By comparison, the higher end of the base pay for a Google software engineer is upwards of $29,000, according to tech industry salary insight platform levels.fyi. A post on DeepSeeks official Wechat social media account declares that the companys devotion is to exploring the essence of AGI or artificial general intelligence. We dont do mediocre things and answer the biggest questions with curiosity and a far-reaching vision, the post added. Australia bans DeepSeek on government devices over security concerns Australia has banned DeepSeek from all government devices over concerns that the Chinese artificial intelligence startup behind it poses security risks, the government said Tuesday. The Secretary of the Department of Home Affairs issued a mandatory direction for all government entities to prevent the use or installation of DeepSeek products, applications and web services and, where found, remove all existing instances of DeepSeek products, applications and web services from all Australian government systems and devices, the statement said. Home Affairs Minister Tony Burke said DeepSeek posed an unacceptable risk to government technology and the immediate ban was to protect Australias national security and national interest, several Australian media outlets reported Tuesday evening. The ban does not extend to devices of private citizens. This photo illustration shows the DeepSeek app on a mobile phone in Beijing Tech stocks worldwide plunged after the launch of DeepSeeks latest AI model last month apparently costing a fraction of rival AI models and requiring less-sophisticated chips raised questions over the Wests huge investments in chipmakers and data centers. Australias decision to ban DeepSeek follows similar action in Italy, while other countries in Europe and elsewhere are also looking into the AI firm. Taiwan banned government departments from using DeepSeeks AI service earlier this week. Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese government imposed a government-wide ban on Chinese social media app TikTok two years ago over security concerns. DeepSeek hasnt just disrupted OpenAI. Chinese tech giants are being upended too DeepSeeks advances have roiled global stock markets and AI players. Now, its influence is spreading quickly at home, with some of Chinas biggest tech companies, many of which had been developing their own chatbots, racing to incorporate the open-source model into their own services. In early February telecoms giant Huawei said it would run DeepSeek on its own computing hardware composed of its Ascend computer processors, which are domestically produced. Some AI watchers have hailed this as a turning point, as it demonstrates that a high-performing model like DeepSeek no longer requires Nvidias most powerful chips to operate. This partnership defies US sanctions by proving China can deliver globally competitive AI performance using domestically developed AI hardware and software stack, replacing Nvidia chips with Ascend chips, analysts at Bernstein, an investment and research firm, wrote in a research note earlier this month. Starting in late 2022, the Biden Administration imposed several rounds of export controls on China in an effort to deprive the country of technology that Washington fears Beijing could use to make the next generation of weapons and AI systems. But the success of DeepSeeks latest R1 AI model, which is said to be trained at a fraction of the cost of established players like ChatGPT, challenged the assumption that cutting off access to advanced chips could successfully stymie Chinas progress. Such is DeepSeeks fame that leading Chinese AI chipmakers including Moore Threads, Tencent-backed Enflame, Baidus Kunlunxin and Hygon Information Technology have also announced support for the firm, running the AI model on their own computing chips. Beyond chips Beyond chipmakers, the cloud arms of major Chinese technology companies have also rushed to incorporate DeepSeeks technology into their offerings. This screengrab shows Chinese hedge fund manager Liang Wenfeng, who founded DeepSeek, in a symposium with Chinese Premier Li Qiang in Beijing on January 20, 2025. Related article China celebrates DeepSeeks breakout AI success as tech race heats up Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu, and TikTok parent Bytedance announced they had made Deepseeks service available through their cloud platforms. The countrys three major telecom operators, along with electronics maker Lenovo and auto brand Geely, have also adopted DeepSeek into their cloud platforms and products. It serves as recognition for open-source large-model companies. If your model is good enough, AI giants will integrate it into their platforms, said Lian Jye Su, chief analyst at Omdia, a technology research firm. These major Chinese tech firms, which have dominated the countrys internet scene for more than a decade, began rolling out their own large language models over the past two years since the debut of ChatGPT in late 2022. Despite having competing products they have welcomed DeepSeek. Su said the primary reason for their adoption is to attract more people and businesses to use their platforms. In reality, making money directly from large models is difficult for AI giants unless there are mature consumer and enterprise applications to support them, he said. Their moves reflect a wider trend. American Big Tech including Nvidia, Microsoft and Amazon have similarly embraced DeepSeek. Topping the charts Deepseek, the Hangzhou-based startup founded in 2023, sent shock waves around the world last month when it launched its newest AI model. Its AI Assistant app quickly topped global download charts, surpassing ChatGPT in late January. Within 20 days of launch, its daily active users have exceeded 22 million, according to state media. Its success has catapulted its founder, Liang Wenfeng, into the ranks of national heroes. Despite the optimism, analysts caution that bottlenecks in Chinas AI chip development remain due to US export restrictions. Porting DeepSeek models to different chip architectures is a lot of low-level software work, and the fact they could do so quickly is amazing, but it doesnt solve the chip shortage problem, said Linghao Bao, senior analyst at Trivium China, a research and advisory firm. The ramp-up of advanced chip production continues to be hampered by the absence of advanced chipmaking equipment, which the US has banned from being exported to China, he said. And outside China, DeepSeeks rapid rise has drawn scrutiny from various governments. Last week, Taiwan and Australia banned their government officials from using the Chinese AI service over data security risks. Some South Korean ministries and government departments have also issued bans. Last month, Italy imposed a blanket block on DeepSeeks app after the company failed to address privacy concerns raised by the authorities. More countries have since raised concerns over the firms data practices. A shocking Chinese AI advancement called DeepSeek is sending US stocks plunging US stocks dropped sharply Monday and chipmaker Nvidia lost nearly $600 billion in market value after a surprise advancement from a Chinese artificial intelligence company, DeepSeek, threatened the aura of invincibility surrounding Americas technology industry. DeepSeek, a one-year-old startup, revealed a stunning capability last week: It presented a ChatGPT-like AI model called R1, which has all the familiar abilities, operating at a fraction of the cost of OpenAIs, Googles or Metas popular AI models. The company said it had spent just $5.6 million on computing power for its base model, compared with the hundreds of millions or billions of dollars US companies spend on their AI technologies. That sent shockwaves through markets, in particular the tech sector, on Monday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq plunged by 3.1% and the broader S&P 500 fell 1.5%. The Dow, boosted by health care and consumer companies that could be hurt by AI, was up 289 points, or about 0.7% higher. Stock market losses were far deeper at the beginning of the day. Meta last week said it would spend upward of $65 billion this year on AI development. Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, last year said the AI industry would need trillions of dollars in investment to support the development of in-demand chips needed to power the electricity-hungry data centers that run the sectors complex models. Marc Andreessen, a supporter of President Donald Trump and one of the worlds leading tech investors, called DeepSeek one of the most amazing and impressive breakthroughs Ive ever seen, in a post on X. The stunning achievement from a relatively unknown AI startup becomes even more shocking when considering that the United States for years has worked to restrict the supply of high-power AI chips to China, citing national security concerns. That means DeepSeek was able to achieve its low-cost model on under-powered AI chips. Tech stocks tumble US tech stocks got hammered Monday. Nvidia (NVDA), the leading supplier of AI chips, fell nearly 17% and lost $588.8 billion in market value by far the most market value a stock has ever lost in a single day, more than doubling the previous record of $240 billion set by Meta nearly three years ago. For perspective, Nvidia lost more in market value Monday than all but 13 companies are worth period. Nvidia began the day as the most valuable publicly traded stock on the market over $3.4 trillion after its shares more than doubled in each of the past two years. It ended the day in third place behind Apple and Microsoft. Meta (META) and Alphabet (GOOGL), Googles parent company, were also down sharply. Nvidia competitors Marvell, Broadcom, Micron and TSMC all fell sharply, too. Oracle (ORCL), Vertiv, Constellation, NuScale and other energy and data center companies tumbled. That dragged down the broader stock market, because tech stocks make up a significant chunk of the market tech constitutes about 45% of the S&P 500, according to Keith Lerner, analyst at Truist. The bottom line is the US outperformance has been driven by tech and the lead that US companies have in AI, Lerner said. The DeepSeek model rollout is leading investors to question the lead that US companies have and how much is being spent and whether that spending will lead to profits (or overspending). This week kicks off a series of tech companies reporting earnings, so their response to the DeepSeek stunner could lead to tumultuous market movements in the days and weeks to come. In the meantime, investors are taking a closer look at Chinese AI companies. Chinese tech companies, including new entrants like DeepSeek, are trading at significant discounts due to geopolitical concerns and weaker global demand, said Charu Chanana, chief investment strategist at Saxo. DeepSeeks rise could spark renewed investor interest in undervalued Chinese AI companies, providing an alternative growth story. A massive rotation out of AI bets The news also sparked a huge change in investments in non-technology companies on Wall Street. Energy companies had been traded up significantly higher in recent years because of the massive amounts of electricity needed to power AI data centers. But they all plummeted Monday. Constellation Energy (CEG), the company behind the planned revival of the Three Mile Island nuclear plant for powering AI, fell 21% Monday. Competitors like Vistra (VST) fell 28% and GE Vernova (GEV) was down 21%. Futures for natural gas, used to power electricity generators, tumbled 5.9%. Oil fell more than 2%. Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies also tumbled. Is this for real? One achievement, albeit a gobsmacking one, may not be enough to counter years of progress in American AI leadership. And a massive customer shift to a Chinese startup is unlikely. So the market selloff may be a bit overdone or perhaps investors were looking for an excuse to sell. Time will tell if the DeepSeek threat is real the race is on as to what technology works and how the big Western players will respond and evolve, said Michael Block, market strategist at Third Seven Capital. Markets had gotten too complacent on the beginning of the Trump 2.0 era and may have been looking for an excuse to pull back and they got a great one here. The industry is also taking the company at its word that the cost was so low. No one is really disputing it, but the market freak-out hinges on the truthfulness of a single and relatively unknown company. Although the cost-saving achievement may be significant, the R1 model is a ChatGPT competitor a consumer-focused large-language model. It hasnt yet proven it can handle some of the massively ambitious AI capabilities for industries that for now still require tremendous infrastructure investments. Thanks to its rich talent and capital base, the US remains the most promising home turf from which we expect to see the emergence of the first self-improving AI, said Giuseppe Sette, president of AI market research firm Reflexivity.